There are so many good textbooks in the field of
human psychology that anyone producing a new one
must have a good excuse, ready to explain his
temerity. Our reason for bringing together the various
authors who have contributed the chapters of this
book is a very simple one. Most textbooks are written
just for future professional psychologists, i.e. for
students who are going to adopt psychology as their
life's work, and whose main area of concentration is
psychology. These students are, of course, a very important group, yet psychology is becoming more and
more important to professionals in other fields as well
-psychiatrists and doctors generally, sociologists,
educationalists, social workers, penologists, and
many, many more. Indeed, hardly any profession
which deals with people has reached a standard of
perfection where training in scientific knowledge of
people would not be useful; these many non-professional psychologists are not very well catered for in
the standard type of textbook which takes up
much time and space with discussions of issues which
may be important and interesting to the psychologist,
but which are irrelevant to the many non-specialists
who wish to gain insight into the main findings of
psychology which might be relevant to their own
work.
We have tried to keep this particularly in mind
when designing this book. We hope, therefore, that it
will fulfil a useful double role: firstly, as a practical
introductory textbook for full-time psychology students and, secondly, as a comprehensive textbook for
students and professionals in other fields who need a
proper understanding of psychology.
This book is largely based on the psychology
course that is taught to psychiatrists in training here
at the Institute of Psychiatry in London. It tends to
give emphasis to the more applied and 'human' areas
of psychology-personality, social, developmental
and abnormal psychology in particular-but there is
also a large section on basic psychological processes
because we believe that a firm foundation in the
general principles of behaviour is essential to effective
applications in the abnormal, or any other, field. It is,
therefore, a general psychology textbook. It differs
from other such texts not so much in content as in
approach. We have concentrated on presenting as
much factual material as possible within the space
available, minimising the amount of history and
philosophy that abounds in many psychology texts. In
this sense the book is more comparable to modern
textbooks of 'harder' sciences such as physics and
physiology. Theories are considered important, but
only theories that are scientific in the sense that they
continuously interact with empirically derived facts.
Theories which seldom make contact with facts (e.g.
Jung's theory of archetypes) are generally ignored.
There is one other point about which we would like
to be explicit. Textbooks often state different theories
regarding a particular phenomenon, or set of phenomena, without giving any opinion as to which of these
theories might be judged superior to the others. In a
textbook directed just at future scientists, this is not
unreasonable; but in a book such as this it seemed
more acceptable to make judgements and to deal
largely with a particular theory, if we felt that this
theory was superior to its rivals in its explanatory
powers and in its support in experimental research.
Similarly, textbooks often deal with discredited researches, simply because textbooks have always dealt
with these studies in the past; it seemed pointless to
us to discuss the research first, and then point out
why it was not worth discussing. We have preferred
to omit the study in question altogether. In some
cases, discredited methods which at one time were
widely used, and a knowledge of which might be useful in reading older texts, have been very briefly discussed and the main reasons given for not going into
details; projective techmques are an example of this
genre. Theories which have been widely held, but
which have not found ready support in experiment,
have not been dealt with, even critically, as already
pointed out; the only exceptions are psychoanalysis
and Laing's existentialism. These theories have
achieved such widespread popularity that we felt it
necessary to show in some detail why they are not
highly regarded by psychologists.
It is sometimes said that introductory textbooks
offer a more systematic treatment if they are authored
rather than edited. We believe that the science of
psychology has reached such proportions that no one
man can claim all-round expertise, and it is especially
when a broad area has to be condensed into a
chapter of twenty pages or less that it is necessary
to have a specialist to do the job. Only a specialist
has sufficient perspective within an area to be able to
abstract the most important material, and only a
specialist is sufficiently familiar with the current literature to be able to sift out genuine discoveries and
viii Introduction
developments from temporary fads and fashions. The
chapters in this book have been mainly prepared by
the members of our own Department who are
currently teaching those topics; they will be recognised as distinguished researchers who have made
substantial contributions to the literature in their
respective fields. Where possible, the chapters are
based on lecture notes that have evolved progressively
over several years, being continually improved and
refined as a result of the teaching experience and
feedback from the students. This, we believe, is one of
the primary advantages that this text may have over
its predecessors.
We have tried to write at a level which would be
intelligible to the layman as well as the professional,
and without too many references, the very profligacy
of which he might find confusing. This has not always
been easy and occasionally we have failed. Our
failures are, however, more often due to difficulties
inherent in the subject matter of a given chapter than
to malevolence of the author; it is easier to write at an
elementary level about Interviewing than about
Memory, for instance. We have tried to combine
scholarly exactness with simplicity and clarity; such
compromises are inherently difficult and no doubt we
have not succeeded in every instance. Yet the effort
seemed worth making. We have tried to organise the
field in such a way that the reader would go away
with an overall pattern, some hint of a general organisation of mental activity, in his mind; we have aimed
at presenting a model of man and have applied this
model to various practical problems, such as criminal
ity, mental disorder, etc. This, of course, is the most
difficult task of all and we are not optimistic that reviewers will concede that we have had even a moderate
success. Nevertheless, we feel that psychology should
strive for something of the kind; the usual collection
of unrelated chapter headings does not inspire students with confidence in the existence of a unitary
subject called 'psychology'. We hope that students
will get the feeling of this model toward which psychology is groping, and will feel inspired to try to
apply it in practice; as we shall argue, such applications as have been made of it in various spheres have
by no means been completely unsuccessful.
We have kept the book as short as possible so that
it might also be useful to students as a practical aid to
retention for examination purposes (the limitations of
lecture notes in this connection are well known and,
in any case, the process of taking notes tends to
interfere with appreciation of the lecture). This leaves
the lecturer free to elaborate on the material in the
text and discuss interesting recent developments in
the field. Most of the material contained in this book
is dealt with in much greater detail in reference books
such as The Handbook of Abnormal Psychology
(Eysenck, 1973) and it may often help the student to
consult this work in addition. Obviously some sacrifices have to be made for the sake of brevity, but we
have tried as far as possible to keep the book
interesting and informative as well as understandable
and manageable.
Hans J. Eysenck and Glenn D:Wilson
Institute of Psychiatry,
University of London,
January, 1976
BASIC PROCESSES
Chapter 1
PSYCHOLOGY AS A
BIO-SOCIAl SCIENCE
H.J. Eysenck
Psychology is so all-pervasive and so important that it
enters into our every thought and action; by definition
almost, the facts and theories of psychology are
central to our mental and physical activities. Psychology, clearly, is about us if it is about anything:
our behaviour, our minds, our emotions, our
intelligence, our crimes and mental disorders, our
problems. This means that ever since human being,
came to the fore in the evolutionary struggle, they
have concerned them,elves with psychological
questions. Some of these questions are philosophical
in nature-Who are we? Why are we here? How did
~e come to be the way we are? Why do we differ so
profoundly from each other? Other questions have a
more practical turn-How can we make other people
do what we want them to do? Who is best suited for
this or that position? Will she be a good wife for me?
Is he trustworthy? Psychology i, still split into a pure
and an applied section, although this differentiation
tends to get more and more blurred. In any case,
psychology has a long past; but it ha, a very short
history. The history of psychology as a science is just
about 100 years long; it was only in 1879 that
Wilhelm Wundt founded the first formal psychological laboratory in Leipzig. Its growth has been very
rapid since those early days, but it is still very young
in comparison with long-established sciences like
physics, or chemistry. Both past and history have
been reviewed in great detail, and with many fascinating details about the many famous people who
contributed to them, by Boring (1950); the History of
Experimental Psychology presents an excellent account of how psychology grew to its present stature.
PSYCHOLOGY AND BEHAVIOURISM
Just as an elephant is easier to recognise than to
describe, so is psychology; p,ychologists tend to
know what they are about, but they do not alway,
agree on a definition of their speciality. Literally,
psychology is the science of the mind or soul, but
psychologists at the time of the first world war
rebelled against such an unenlightening name; we are
merely defining one unknown in terms of another.
They also rebelled against the method of controlled
introspection which was then the most widely used
method of experimental psychology; nothing of any
value seemed to have grown out of all the counties,
hours spent looking into one's own mind, or getting
some colleagues or senior students to look into theirs.
Furthermore, what one found there seemed to be
determined by what one expected to find-or what
one's teacher expected to find; Wiirzburg psychologists found different content in their minds to
Gottingen psychologists, in much the same way that
patients treated by Freudian analysts dream in
Freudian symbols, while patients treated by Jungian
analysts dream in Jungian symbols. This rebellion,
led by the founder of the Behaviourist school, J. B.
Watson, suggested that psychology is concerned with
behaviour, not with minds; it is only behaviour
(including in this term all the events taking place
inside the body, such as muscular contractions, nerve
signals, hormonal secretions and the like, as well as
outwardly visible movements, speech, etc.) that can
be observed objectively and can thus serve as the
basis for a properly scientific discipline. Psychology
as the science of behaviour is now almost universally
agreed by psychologists to be the best label we can
pin to our subject matter; mind and soul are recognised as relics from the Cartesian dualism which
split matter and mind asunder in such a way that
no-one could put them together again, a dualism
which is fairly universally recognised nowadays to
have served its purpose, and to be of little use in
dealing with the observable world of living things.
The tenets of behaviourism are often misunderstood, and it may be worthwhile to point out that
there are different varieties of behaviourism. Two in
particular must be sharply differentiated, if only
because it is the first of these that is usually held up
to ridicule by critics, while it is the second which is
actually embraced by psychologists working in the
experimental tradition. In the first place, then, we
have philosophical behaviourism; this makes statements about the real existence of matter and the nonexistence of mind, consciousness, etc.-statements
which are reminiscent of naive realism (a rather oldfashioned philosophical doctrine, not taken seriously
by professional philosophers), and which are just
embarrassing to most psychologists who do not have
much interest in philosophy anyway. In the second
place, we have methodological behaviourism; this
makes statements about the kinds of evidence that we
need in psychology, and the kinds of proof required
in order to substantiate scientific hypotheses. Methodologically, we are all behaviourists; we recognise
that behaviour is our subject matter, this being the
only objective 'given' that we can study, and that is in
4 Basic processes
the public domain. Peter Medawar once jokingly said
that the essence of behaviourism lay in the distinction
between saying: 'The dog was sad' and 'The dog
howled'-there is much truth in this remark. We can
observe that the dog is howling; to deduce that the
dog is sad constitutes an anthropomorphic jump into
uncertainty that takes us straight out of science.
Note that methodological behaviourism does not
say (as does philosophical behaviourism) that we have
no consciousness; such nonsensical declarations
scientists leave with advantage to philosophers. Be·
haviourists would tend to agree on some such
statement as this: Verbal communication is behaviour,
and is therefore a proper source of information for
psychologists. Whether it can be admitted as a true
indicator of some inner state depends on whether or
not corroborative evidence is available. The fact that
I say 'I have a headache' cannot be accepted
necessarily as evidence that I have a headache; I may
simply be trying to get out of some engagement by
pleading illness. But it cannot be rejected as meaningless either; I often tell the truth. One would look for
corroborative, behavioural evidence of the 'headache'
if one really had serious doubts; thus one might
apply physiological measures of muscular stress to
the frontalis muscles which are usually involved in
genuine headaches. But be that as it may, it is possible
to agree on certain procedures which incorporate
verbal behaviour with other types of behaviour and
make it subject to psychological analysis.
VERBAL BEHAVIOUR
Verbal behaviour is often self-validating. If you wish
to know whether I am colour blind, you can present
me with certain colours, of equal brightness, and ask
me to name them; that I can do so is ipso facto
evidence of my not being colour blind; it is not
necessary to speculate about the state of my consciousness. A purist might prefer to condition certain
behaviours to the colours, and see whether the conditioned responses occur in me; thus he might tFach
me to salivate on seeing red by always giving me
something to eat after showing me a patch of red
colour. But this would be regarded as absurd even by
the most conscientious behaviourists; speech is
universally admitted as a reasonable aspect of human
behaviour.
The kind of interplay that serves to establish verbal
behaviour as meaningful in psychological research
may be illustrated by.an example. This example deals
with verbal conditioning, a technique in which the
subject is presented with cards saying something like:
D will go to town.
Each card has a different sentence on it, and the
subject has to read the sentence, making use of
whichever personal pronoun he wishes. The experiment continues for some 20 trials or so, to see with
what frequency the subject uses each pronoun. Then
begins the conditioning trial; whenever the subject
uses a preselected pronoun (e.g. 'They'), the experimenter nods, or says 'good', or makes some
appropriate noise. Gradually the subject begins to
use this pronoun more and more, and the increase in
use of the conditioned pronoun is the score on the
test. People differ greatly with respect to the degree of
conditioning evidenced, and it was predicted, for
reasons which will become apparent in a later chapter,
that introverted people would respond better to the
conditioning paradigm. Many studies have been
published, some of which found introverts better,
others extroverts, and others found no difference.
These results can be reconciled if we go on to say
that often the subject guesses what is going on; he
acquires 'awareness' of the contingencies involved in
the experiment. Now the prediction only applies to
unaware subjects; extroverts may condition poorly,
but when aware of what is going on may be more
likely than introverts to wish to please the experimenter, and hence play the game for him. If this were
so, we would expect that with subjects lacking in
'awareness', introverts would condition better; in
subjects with 'awareness', extroverts might give a
better performance. When subjects were verbally
interrogated about what they thought had been
happening in the experiment, they could be grouped
into 'aware' and 'unaware', and indeed personality
correlated with performance in contradictory ways in
the two groups, as expected. Now the verbal statements of 'awareness' might be considered analogous
to introspection, but in this case we have weighty
external evidence to reassure us that the verbal statement is in fact true; it gives evidence of knowledge,
and fits in with a larger theoretical system which
predicts what should happen. As far as the argument
90
80
Penile 70
plethysmo·
graph 60
50
Increase 40
in Volume
(arbitrary 30
units) 20
10
Breast Cunni- '69'
woman fondling lingus
Kissing Intercourse Fellatio
and
cuddling
Figure 1.1 Increase in size of penis as a function of
content of imagery
goes, therefore, we may accept verbal statements in
this situation, and for this purpose. Not to do so
would deprive us of important information which
could not be gained in any other way. Refusal of
relevant and important evidence would be a sign of
rigidity and bias.
Even such apparently nebulous terms as 'imagery'
can be tied down securely to observable facts. Let us
suppose that I tell you to imagine certain situations,
say of a sexual nature. You tell me what you see in
your imagination. Can a behaviourist accept this as
evidence? Figure 1.1 shows the results of an experiment in which the subject was instructed to imagine,
each for 20 seconds, the seven items listed on the
abscissa. On the ordinate are given figures taken from
a penis plethysmograph. which is an instrument which
measures with considerable accuracy the size of his
penis. It will be seen that the more erotic the image,
the greater the enlargement of the penis. We may
accept the reality of the internal process because it is
tied down securely to observable and measurable
events preceding (instructions) and following (penis
plethysmograph) the unobservable event.
THE DEFINITION OF PSYCHOLOGY
We have so far concentrated on methods of investigation and on the usefulness of the behaviouristic
doctrine; we are still far away from being able to
define psychology. To say that it deals with
human behaviour is fine and accurate as far as it
goes; however, there are other sciences or disciplines
which also claim to deal with human behavioursociology, physiology, anthropology, economics,
genetics and many others might be mentioned here.
How can we demarcate the realm of psychology, and
indicate in which way it is differentiated from these
other disciplines? The first answer might be that it
cannot be done at all; academic subjects are in large
part artefacts of the curriculum--divisions which are
Genetics
Physiology
Neurology
Anatomy
Biochemistry
Pharmacology
etc.
Biological·
Sciences
History
Sociology
Anthropology
Economics
Sociometry
Social
Disciplines
etc
Figure 1.2 The position of psychology as a link between
the biological and social sciences
Psychology as a bio-social science 5
made for the convenience of administrators, and of
students who cannot be expected to learn more than a
given, limited amount of material in their three or four
years at university. There is no absolute line of
demarcation between psychology and physiology, or
psychology and sociology, such that we might say:
'This investigation is clearly physiology, not psychology', or: 'That study falls within the purview of
psychology, not sociology.' But having said this, there
is a way in which we can differentiate these various
subjects, in principle, at least; there will still be
overlap, but the main outlines of the various subjects
may become clearer.
Consider Figure 1.2. It delineates two large groups
of subjects. On the left, we have a sample of the
biological sciences-genetics, physiology, neurology,
anatomy, biochemistry, pharmacology, etc. On the
right, we have a sample of the social disciplineshistory, sociology, anthropology, economics, sociometry, etc. Like a circus rider skilfully straddling
two horses (or like a man sitting down between two
chairs!) psychology clearly partakes of both groups of
sciences. This may be an obvious statement to make,
but it has tremendous consequences: psychology is
both a biological and a social science. The ramifications of this statement will be discussed in what
follows; here let us merely note that clearly physiology is a biological science, sociology a social one;
these and the other disciplines mentioned do not
meet, except where they are related through some
psychological content or theory. This is the
importance of psychology and this is the reason for
its existence: psychology alone makes the attempt to
tie together these different and heterogeneous groups
of subjects and mediate between them. Is this a
sensible thing to do, and why should anyone try to
carry out such a difficult and perhaps impossible
task?
Physiology deals with segmental processes; it is
concerned with minutiae of reflex activity, carefully
studying one reflex at a time, or with specific organ
systems of one kind or another. Such segmental
studies are of the utmost importance, but they do not
tell us what happens when these segments are
activated in vivo as part of a larger whole--man.
Take a particular example. During the first world war,
there was much interest in night blindness; obviously
a sentry who cannot see in the dark would be a
danger to himself and his whole company, and it was
clearly important to know the likely number of nightblind soldiers. Physiologists had studied the conditions giving rise to night-blindness, and gave a
reassuring answer-given that enough carrots were
available, only a very small number of people were
likely to be affected. In actual combat, it soon became
clear that the answer given was out by several
thousand per cent; there were quite large numbers of
night blind soldiers in all the armies involved in the
6 8 asic processes
gigantic struggle. The reason soon became obvious.
The fine adjustments involved in focussing and seeing
in the dark could easily be thrown out of gear by
fear; neurotic soldiers suffered from night blindness in
a functional sense. There was nothing physiologically
wrong with their physical equipment, but the upsurge
of autonomic excitement which was produced by
situations of real or imaginary danger made it
impossible for them to make use of their equipment.
The physiologist could say, quite truthfully, that he
had been asked quite a different question, and that
his answer had been correct. This was no consolation
to those who had originally asked the question; they
were concerned with the interaction of physiological
systems, i.e. with a psychological problem. This is not
to say that psychology is better (or worse) than
physiology; it is simply different. It looks upon the
physiological equipment of man from the point of
view of use in actual life, and this use in actual life
usually implies certain social connotations. The
physiologist quite rightly declines to leave his laboratory and take into account variables he has not been
trained to deal with; the psychologist has no choice
but to study these variables and try to integrate them
with whatever he may learn from the physiologist.
The sociologist, on the other hand, is concerned
entirely with social variables; such institutions as
marriage, government and criminality are his concern.
But of course these institutions are run by individuals,
by persons, and it takes a psychologist to undertake
the study of persons in institutions. Similarly for
economics; economics lays down general laws
according to which behaviour should function, but
the psychologist knows only too well that people
don't usually do what they are supposed to do--such
as buy in the cheapest market, and sell in the dearest.
Psychological experiments have shown that when
identical goods are sold at di..tTerent prices, many
people pay two or three times the lowest price, even
though the choice is right in front of their noses.
Economics may be able to formulate laws covering
rational behaviour, but psychologists have found
time and time again that human behaviour is only
intermittently rational. Hence on the social side too,
psychology is needed to mediate the general and
abstract laws of sociology, economics, and the other
'dismal sciences' which throng the right side of our
diagram.
Psychologists thus have the duty to look at man as
a whole, and to take into account both his biological
nature and the social context within which he alone
can exist. This is not an easy task, and it is hardly
to be wondered at that many psychologists have
concentrated on isolated aspects of the job. There are
physiological psychologists who are often difficult to
distinguish from physiologists; there are social psychologists equally difficult to distinguish from
sociologists. Even among behaviourists interested in
quite general experimental work that would place
them somewhere at the centre of our diagram, there
are often to be found odd notions such as that of the
'empty organism'-a doctrine according to which
physiology is too backward to tell us anything of
interest about psychological processes, or even that
physiology is never likely to be able to make an
important contribution to psychology. In line with
such thinking, psychologists must 'go it alone' and
elaborate functional relations between stimuli and
responses; these, it is declared, are the fundamental
bits and pieces out of which a proper science will
eventually be built.
THE STIMULUS-RESPONSE SYSTEM
For many years this view, enshrined in the symbolism
of the 'S-R bond', was to be found in every
introductory textbook, and it must be said that the
notion underlying it had an intuitive appeal to many
students. If you can discover which stimuli produce
which responses, or if you can investigate the laws
according to which new S-R bonds are fashioned, by
learning or conditioning, then you can manipulate
responses by suitably manipulating stimuli. This stress
on manipulation has always been strongly associated
with behaviourism; note J. B. Watson's well-known
saying: 'Psychology as the behaviourist views it is a
purely objective experimental branch of natural
science. Its theoretical goal is the prediction and
control of behaviour.' Can we indeed obtain 'control'
over behaviour by simply manipulating stimuli.? As
we shall see, this whole notion is so grossly oversimplified that scientific investigation and experimentation has suffered greatly by the restrictions
imposed by it.
Behaviourists often argued that their model was
in line with the models adopted by workers in the
'hard' sciences. A physicist may study the expansion
of metals as a function of heat, or an astronomer the
Doppler effect (red-shift) as a function of the distance
of stellar objects. True, some form of functionalism
is implied in the typical equation written by scientists, a=(f)b. However, there is something missing in
this whole argument. Different metals expand
differently with heat, and in order to get any meaningful answer we have to specify the precise nature of
the metal (or alloy) we are using. Similarly, different
organisms respond differently to different stimuli, and
unless we take this into account we will be quite
unable to make any meaningful predictions-let alone
exert any kind of control! Accordingly, we may have
to expand our formula to read: S-O-R; the stimulus
strikes the organism, interacts with the innate and
acquired properties of the organism, and the organism
then emits a response. Why did this obvious point
take so long to penetrate, and why is it still honoured
more in the breach than in the observance?
The answer must be speculative, but undoubtedly
there is a good historical reason. Biological workers
interested in psychology tended to have a strongly
genetic approach to the subject; often human
behaviour was assumed to be generated by 'instincts'
which dictated precisely what type of response should
be made to different types of stimuli. Opponents of
this doctrine had little difficulty in showing that it was
not of much use in psychology; accounting for
sociable behaviour in terms of an 'instinct' of sociability was clearly a circular process which did not
'explain' anything. The -doctrine of instincts fell into
disrepute, and a whole-hogging environmentalism
took over which allied itself with the doctrine of the
'empty organism', to produce modern behaviourism
which still often echoes Watson's proud boast that if
you gave him control of the environment, then he
could make young children into anything he chose,
from genius to beggarman. Alas, things are not as
simple as that; the organism arrives on the scene
fully fitted out with genes and chromosomes which
determine its capacities and emotional reactivity, its
abilities and personality, to a very marked degree-as
we shall see in later chapters. A simple-minded disbelief in genetics has always characterised
manipulative societies, such as the U.S.A. and the
U.S.S.R.; genetics seems to set limits to the power of
the state to transform itself and its citizens into some
Utopian ideal, and a tabula rasa hypothesis seems
much more acceptable. The impressive empirical
work of ethologists, studying different animal species
in great detail in their every-day lives, has revived the
doctrine of instincts, although in a much more
sophisticated form, and altogether the pendulum is
swinging back towards a position less eccentrically
emphasising only the one side of the heredity-environment interaction equation. (Some behaviourists, rather
reluctantly, have recognised the importance of the
organism by postulating that 8-R rehitions are
influenced to some extent by the 'history of reinforcement' of the organism, i.e. by the rewards and
punishments it received in the past; this purely
environmental view of 0 has to be supplemented by
recognition of the genetic determinants of behaviour.)
A more complete chain of events might look like
Figure 1.3, which takes into account the most important aspects of human behaviour. We begin with
the stimulus, recognising that there is an important
difference between physical stimuli (Sp) and social
stimuli (Ss), and that there may also be internal
stimuli (Sr) which emanate from the person's viscera.
Tliese stimuli strike the organism, which is in a state
of readiness to react to them in certain ways,
determined partly by genetic (G), partly by environmental (E) antecedents. The organism then emits
responses, which may be mediated by the autonomic
nervous system, i.e. are emotional in nature (RA),
which may be cognitive, i.e. thoughts or ideas (Rd. or
which may be motor movements (RM). These
Psychology as a bio-social science 7
responses finally lead to an effector state (E±) which
may be either pleasant (indicated by the + sign) or
unpleasant (indicated by the - sign). The pleasantness
or otherwise of this state constitutes the positive. or
negative reinforcement produaed by the whole chain
of events; this in turn modifies the organism (through
5S~
5, --
5p/
G E
Figure 1.3 A model of behaviour
learning and conditioning) in such a way that in future
it will seek or avoid the stimuli which herald the final
effector state. We have come a long way from the
simple 8-R formula, and many psychologists still
yearn for the relative simplicity of that formula;
however, the evidence for its inadequacy is too strong
to allow us to return to it.
Different groups of psychologists concern themselves with different parts of the larger formula given
in Figure 1.3. For instance 0 is the field studied by
behavioural geneticists; Sp-O is studied by workers in
the traditional field of perception. Ss-O constitutes
the relatively new field of social perception; where
traditional workers would use lights and sounds
carrying no meaning as their stimuli, workers in this
new field would be concerned with facts such as that
poor youngsters overestimate the size of high-value
coins, or that college students take longer to recognise
words which refer to unpleasant or pornographic
items ('perceptual defence'). Sp-RA would be a field of
study in which Pavlovian conditioning would be
characteristic; Sp-RM would be concerned with
operant conditioning, as we shall see later on in the
book. E ± would be concerned with motivation. It will
be obvious then that while in every behavioural act
the whole chain is involved, it may be necessary for experimental purposes to study one particular aspect or
connection within the chain, and to try to 'hold constant' the remainder--however difficult that may be.
THE INTERACTION OF SOCIAL AND
BIOLOGICAL FACTORS
The fact that human beings are at one and the same
time biological organisms and the products of a social
environment means that we are inevitably concerned,
at all times, with the paradigm of interaction. Biological and social factors and influences are
constantly interacting with each other, and no attempt
to understand psychology can possibly succeed which
does not bear this in mind. There are in psychology
8 Basic processes
s.ociotropes and biotropes, people who stress one or
the other side alone, and at best give lip service to the
other; such men are dangerous. The danger involved
in such one-sided enthusiasm is simply that we try to
impose on nature our prejudices, rather than allow
nature to teach us what the facts are; scientists have
to have their share of humility and take their cue from
nature.
The danger is particularly apparent when. the
psychological problems in question have social and
political aspects. In the early days of the century, for
instance, many psychologists held a strongly genetic
position which ascribed all (or nearly all) differences
in intelligence, to take but one example, to heredity,
including the large differences in I.Q. observed
between white and black Americans; from this
allegedly scientific basis strongly racist conclusions
were then drawn. The science of genetics gave no
support to these assumptions, and of course the racist
conclusions would in any case have had no scientific
support, being purely political in nature. Later on,
largely as a reaction, many psychologists held a
similarly extreme view emphasising environment and
stating as a fact that all races had innately identical
intelligence, with the observed differences being due to
environmental deprivations of various kinds. These
beliefs were based on no firmer evidence than those
rejected; the wish, in both cases, was the father of the
child.
Both heredity and environment clearly play their
part in observable, phenotypic behaviour; such an
interactionist doctrine suggests the importance, not of
emphasising one or the other, but of discovering with
some precision the relative contributions of the two
factors in any particular situation. This requires
complex and difficult experimental investigations, and
the construction of ger,etic models which are testable
against the facts unearthed. Much is now known
about the relative part played by heredity and environment in the causation of I.Q. differences, at least
as far as people living in the U.S.A., the U.K., and the
European continent are concerned; when it comes to
racial differences no results are available which carry
similar conviction.
One particular area of dispute between sociotropes
and biotropes has been the relevance of animal work.
Ever since Pavlov used the conditioning paradigm
derived from his work with cats and rats, psychologists have argued about the relevance of the results
to human learning and conditioning. The arguments
against 'rat psychology' are quite strong. It is said
that species differences are much too large to enable
us to argue from one species to another, least of all
from such lowly animals as rats to animals having the
power of speech, like man. There may be superficial
similarities between rats running mazes and children
learning some simple motor habits, but these do not
extend to specifically human learning, which involves
speech, thought and other human attributes not
found in rats. Similarly, the motivating conditions of
the two species are quite different-rats are. usually
motivated in the laboratory by hunger and thirst,
more rarely by sex, and most frequently by electric
shock, while motivations for humans, at least those
living in affluent Western countries, tend on the whole
to be more subtle and less obvious. It may make
sense to talk about 'drive reduction' theories of motivation in hungry, thirsty, or otherwise deprived rats; it
may be difficult to see how relevant this is to human
beings living in stable societies. If we are interested
in the abilities, motivations, etc. which made
Shakespeare write his sonnets, or which made
Newton evolve his theory of gravitation, we are
unlikely to get too much help from rats running
mazes, or avoidin~ shock in a shuttle box, or even
pressing levers in a Skinner box. For these and many
other obvious reasons, rat psychology is in bad
repute with many people, and students often dismiss it
contemptuously as useless. This is probably a onesided point of view.
Biologically, rats share with us certain very
impressive similarities. They possess, like us, a central
nervous system, issuing in a cortex; they have an
autonomic system which mediates emotional expression; they have sense organs very similar to ours.
They respond to physical stimuli much as we do; they
respond to drugs in ways not too dissimilar to
ourselves. They can learn, and they become conditioned, in ways which are qualitatively and
quantitatively similar, in considerable detail, to our
ways. To stress the differences, to the exclusion of the
similarities, is one-sided, just as it would be one-sided
to look at the similarities alone and conclude that rats
were perfect replicas of humans. The issue simply
cannot be resolved by a priori statements, or in terms
of common sense assessment; it boils down to a
precise evaluation of those areas where rats can be
used with some degree of confidence as analogues of
human beings, and those where the differences are too
great to make this useful. Consider a few examples to
illustrate the possible usefulness of animal analogues
in this context.
THE RELEVANCE OF ANIMAL
EXPERIMENTS
There is a well-known behaviour pattern among
rats called the 'Columbus effect'. A male rat will tire
of being with the same female rat for any length of
time, and his number of mountings and intromissions
will decline. Furnish him with a new partner and his
vigour will return. This parallels a well-documented
pattern in human behaviour; number of copulations
in marriage declines steeply during the first year, and
then declines more gradually; this gradual decline is
probably due to increasing age, but the precipitate
decline during the first year is very similar to the
Columbus effect. Now it is of course perfectly true to
argue that men are not rats; human behaviour is not
governed exclusively (as is rat behaviour) by biological mechanisms. The institution of marriage, the
persistence of love, the mutual usefulness of members
of a pair bond are social influences which may
counteract the biological determination of the
Columbus effect. It would be as unrealistic (and hence
as unscientific) to disregard the social forces entering
the equation, as it would be to disregard the biological
ones. Work with rats may clarify the precise nature of
the latter; to that degree it is useful. Work with rats
will tell us little about the former; to that extent it can
be misleading.
As another example, take Pavlov's work on conditioning with dogs (Pavlov, 1927). He carefully and
precisely worked out the main laws according to
which conditioning takes place, and these laws have
been shown to apply in very much the same manner
to human beings. It is much easier to work with
dogs, and our knowledge has increased enormously
due to Pavlov's extensive studies. Now obviously it is
also necessary to demonstrate that what is true of
dogs is also true of humans; consequently a great deal
of experimental work has also been done with
humans. This work was inspired by Pavlov's findings,
and directed in every particular by the theories and
laws he had based on his discoveries. Pavlovian
conditioning plays a vital part in human behaviour; it
lies at the basis of neurotic behaviour, to take but one
example. But of course, here also, the animal work
only gives us the biological side of things; even in
Pavlovian conditioning there is a social side to
consider, and this cannot be discovered from animal
work alone. Thus it would be one-sided and unscientific to reject Pavlov's findings because they
were based on animal work, or to accept them
uncritically as applying without change to human
beings. We can learn from animals, but we cannot
learn all there is to be known from animals.
As a third example, consider the important work of
J. Masserman (1943) with cats. He would teach cats
to get food from a box; next he would electrify the
box so that the cats would get a shock when touching
it. This is a situation of approach-avoidance conflict;
the hungry cats have a strong drive (hunger) which
propels them towards the box, but they also have an
aversive drive (pain avoidance) which pushes them in
the opposite direction, away from the box. This
approach-avoidance situation has been studied in
great detail by N. Miller (see Gray, 1971), whose
work will be discussed in some detail later in this
book; it is very conducive to the genesis of neurotic
behaviour (Eysenck, 1974). This was observable in
Masserman's cats; it has also been found true in
human behaviour. Again, it is of course true that
human and cat behaviour are not identical; the
conflicts generated by approach-avoidance situations
Psychology as a biD-social science 9
are different in the two cases, being less closely bound
to biological stimuli (food, shock) in humans. Nevertheless, the similarities are considerable; they enable
us to achieve a much better understanding of neurosis.
As has been well said:
'Masserman the cat man,
Makes cats neurotic;
Are cats and humans,
Really asymptotic?
Can we really take over general laws largely based
on animal work, and apply them to human problems?
Consider a particular problem, that of children who
bang their heads. This is a terribly dangerous
practice; children have been known to kill themselves,
or to detach their retinae by the banging and become
blind. What can be done about it? Physicians used to
advise strapping the children to a chair; this certainly
prevents them from banging their heads, but it is
hardly a procedure which can be used for any length
of time, and is really a counsel of despair. Psychoanalysts advised love and affection; whenever the
child started to bang his head, mothers were told to
go and hug and kiss the child. This is a humane
method, but unfortunately a counter-productive one;
the children banged their heads more and more!
Readers might like to stop here and think how they
would deal with this problem, using common sense as
a guide; in the next paragraph we will then go on to
discuss suggestions emanating from animal work.
Towards the turn of the century, E. L. Thorndike
announced the Law of Effect; this states, essentially,
that animals (including people) will tend to repeat
those activities and actions which in the past have led
to pleasant, acceptable consequences, and to shun
those activities and actions which in the past have led
to unpleasant, noxious consequences. B. F. Skinner,
another American psychologist, took up this notion
half a century later and based his law of reinforcement on extensive work with rats and pigeons;
positive reinforcement (a technical name for reward)
led to repetition, negative reinforcement to abandonment of the particular activities preceding either. This
general sort of approach (which is similar to the
philosophical doctrine of hedonism, but goes beyond
it in many ways, and is much more specific in its
recommendations) leads to a quite clear-cut approach
to our head-bangers. Whenever the child starts to
bang his head, the mother is instructed to pick him up
and take him to a small room; there he is locked in
for 10 minutes, all alone. The mother shows no
emotion, and neither does she scold the child when
he is let out again after his period of 'detention' is up.
This 'time out' procedure provides negative reinforcement for the action preceding it (i.e. the head
banging), just as hugging and kissing the child, in
accordance with the psychoanalytic recommendation, provides positive reinforcement. No wonder
lOB asic processes
the psychoanalytic method makes things worse; the
child is actually being rewarded for misbehaving! The
behaviouristic method works extremely well, and
quickly; most children are cured within a matter of
weeks. The cure is permanent, and does not lead to
'symptom substitution', as many psychiatrists feared;
in other words, no alternative symptoms appear
when the head banging is stopped. With a small
group of children something stronger than 'time out'
is needed; a slight electric shock, administered whenever the head banging starts, followed by 'time out',
may be required.
This example of 'behaviour therapy' (which will be
discussed in much more detail in a later chapter) may
deserve some more detailed study. In the first place, it
shows that general laws derived from animal work
can be applied with considerable success to human
behaviour. At the same time, these laws can be used
to explain why other types of treatment (such as
psychoanalytic treatment) fail to work. Clearly, ra.s
and humans are not so distant on the evolutionary
scale that certain uniformities cannot be discovered
and used to cross the species boundaries. The method
of treatment so discovered may seem obvious once
the suggestion has been made, but for many years
common sense, medical ingenuity, and psychoanalytic
insight all failed miserably in their efforts to find a
solution to this particular problem. In the same way,
it seems obvious to us that the earth circles round the
sun, and that apples and planets obey the law of
gravitation; these self-evident truths were far from
self-evident 500 years ago, and required great scientific acumen and insight to establish. The laws of
positive and negative reinforcement may also seem
obvious when stated so broadly; they are of course
much more precise and detailed than anything we
have stated so far, and go well beyond common
sense, or philosophical hedonism.
PROBLEMS OF APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY
The example shows that behaviouristic methods,
derived from animal studies, can work; there are
many other examples which will be found in later
pages of this book. It used to be quite popular to deny
that such methods could ever work; this objection has
not survived the many obvious successes of behaviour
therapy. Now it is more popular to say that these
methods are simply ways of inducing conformity in
people, and that manipulation of other persons, as is
implied in all behaviouristic methods, is inherently
wrong and inhumane. This type of objection is more
difficult to answer because there is an element of truth
in it. Nevertheless, we believe it to be mistaken. Let us
note first of all that from birth to the grave man
attempts to manipulate others, and is in turn manipulated by them. The baby is 'manipulated' to suck at
the mother's breast, and later on to take solid food
and come off the mother's breast. The child is
'manipulated' to learn reading and writing, and all the
other things which he needs in order to live happily in
society. The adolescent is 'manipulated' to take a job,
earn a living, and maintain a family. The girl is
'manipulated' into bed by her boyfriend. The voter
is 'manipulated' to give his vote to politicians whose
concern for his welfare is more verbal than real, and
more apparent before than after the election. We are
all 'manipulated' by advertisements to buy this rather
than that. Opponents of racial discrimination search
for methods to 'manipulate' racists successfully.
Sometimes manipulation is disguised as appeal to
reason, but this is not usually a very convincing mask.
Wisdom begins with the realisation that all social
living implies manipulation of one person by another;
manipulation is the essence of social living-only the
hermit is free from it.
Equally important as the fact of manipulation is
the motive for manipulation. It is idle to say that all
manipulation is bad; without it we would still be
animals living in a state of nature-our lives being
nasty, brutish, and short. It is easy to say: 'Do your
thing'; the question is of course whether 'your thing'
is completely innate (which seems extremely unlikely),
or whether it is due to various social inftuenceswhich imply 'manipulation'. Some kinds of manipulation are obviously of help to the person concerned;
the baby would starve if his mother did not orient his
mouth correctly to the breast, and the head banger
might kill himself if we did not advise the mother
correctly. It is not reasonable to say: 'Well, let him
kill himself if that is what he wants'. The child is not
able to foresee the consequences of his actions and
certainly does not wish to kill himself. Or consider
the patient who comes to the behaviour therapist with
acute phobic fears and generalised anxieties. He is
driven to distraction by his troubles and may be near
suicide; if methods of 'manipulation' exist which can
cure him and restore him to mental health, and if he is
only too desirous of being 'manipulated' in this
fashion, would it not be inhumane to withhold
treatment? Again, the grown man often thanks those
who in his youth 'manipulated' him in such a way that
he learned to read, thus opening up to him a vast new
world of delight and happiness; had he been left
alone, without any pressure at all, he might still be
illiterate. Children, as they grow up, often reproach
their laissez-faire parents, saying: 'Why didn't you
make me do that?' when some deficit becomes
apparent in their education or upbringing, which
could easily have been dealt with earlier on.
On the other hand, manipulation can obviously
also be bad, in the sense that it is used for the interest
of the manipulator, rather than of the person manipulated. It seems hardly necessary to give examples;
advertising which makes use of natural fears of
death, disease, social isolation and other negative
feelings for the purpose of selling useless and possibly
dangerous drugs, creams, etc., is too well-known to all
of us. More interesting are those cases where a good
case could be made either way. Consider homosexuality. Many homosexuals come to the therapist
asking for treatment; they do not wish to live out their
lives in their present state. Assuming that aversion
therapy (which will be discussed later on) is able to
make them heterosexual, is this a case of 'bad'
manipulation? The question seems to hinge on
whether or not the patient really and truly wishes to
be changed, or whether he is merely reacting to social
prompting-by family, a court order, or some other
agency. In the former case there seems to be no
reason to consider the case in a different category
from the patient suffering from anxiety; there may be
difficulties in being sure of one's facts, but in principle
we would not seem to have the right to withhold
treatment from a patient who is suffering and wishes
to be cured. In the latter case, we may take one of
two positions. We may declare that social pressure is
immoral, and that the therapist should refuse to
undertake the treatment. Or we may take the view
that the therapist as therapist can do nothing to alter
social pressures, but must leave the decision to the
patient; if the patient decides that under the circumstances he would prefer to opt for treatment, then it is
not up to the therapist to refuse to implement this
decision. If the patient is clearly unwilling, but society
is insistent, then the therapist of course has an ethical
duty to the patient, rather than to society; under no
circumstances would he be justified in 'manipulating' the patient against his will.
In all this, behaviourists do not encounter difficulties which are in any way different from those
encountered by psychiatrists, psychoanalysts, social
workers, and many other people concerned with
social treatment of any kind. The principles of action
suggested above are no different from those which
might be accepted by other workers in this field;
behaviouristic methods do not differ in principle from
those of other groups. Nor can we pretend that
there is always a 'true' answer to the problems thrown
up by society; there is often room for genuine
disagreement among well-meaning persons desperately trying to do the right thing. The behaviourist
psychologist, any more than the psychoanalyst, or the
psychiatrist, is not a moral philosopher by training; he
is just as likely to make mistakes as the next person.
Notwithstanding this obvious human fallibility, it
should not be assumed that he is any less well-meaning, or any less conscious of his ethical duties, than
other workers in this field. 