Hallucinations
Little is known about hallucinations, but it is tempting
to suggest that they result from the imposition of
patterns and meaning on random inputs. Thus they
tend to occur when people are deliberately put in
minimally structured environments as in sensory
deprivation experiments. It has also been suggested
that drugs such as LSD produce entirely novel
sensory experiences on which the observer tries to
impose meaning. Auditory hallucinations found in
alcohol withdrawal have been found to result from
attempts to impose meaning on noises produced by a
pathological state of the middle ear (Sarayay and
Pardes, 1967).
However, the important dimension of hallucinations
is the extent to which the observer believes in their
reality, and this aspect is somewhat removed from the
topic of perception.
SOCIAL PERCEPTION AND PREJUDICE
The economy achieved by perceptual processes
depends on having expectations about the environment. When this principle is applied to the perception
of people it seems synonymous with prejudice. To
26 Basic processes
treat every individual a~ a unique entity would put an
impossible load on information processing and
memory. We assum:e that certain verbal and nonverbal cues are important for communication and
understanding and ignore the rest. Which particular
cues we select for attention may vary on the basis of
expectations about race, sex, class and other, finer
classifications. Clearly if our expectations are false
and we pay attention to the wrong cues communication will be difficult.
These expectancies are not Quite the same as those
associated with terms such as race prejudice and clas!>
prejudice. The latter prejudices must involve largely
negative expectations about the behaviour of the
individuals or groups being judged. That there is a
close relation between such attitudes and perception is
demonstrated by lln experiment of Allport and Kramer
(1946). These workers found that people with strong
anti-Semitic prejudice were able to distinguish Jews
from non-Jews more accurately than unprejudiced
people. Presumably anti-Semites consider the division
of people into Jews and non-Jews of vital importance
in their world. They therefore pay attention to the
cues indicating Jewishness (whatever they may be)
and ignore other features. Another characteristic of
the person having race prejudice is that he must be
able to classify every person he is in contact with as
either a member of the 'good' race or of the 'bad'
race. Such a strict division is objectively impossible
References
Allport, G. W. and Kramer, B. M. (1946). Some roots of
prejudice. J. Psychol., 22, 9-39
Bannister, D. and Fransella, F. (1966). A grid test of
schizophrenic thought disorder. Brit. J. Soc. Clin. Psychol., 5, 95-102
Blakemore, C. and Cooper, G. F. (1970): Development of
the brain depends on the visual environment. Nature
(London), 228, 477-478
Borges, J. L. (1964). Funes the Memorious. In: Labyrinths
(New York: New Directions)
Borges, J. L. and Casares, A. B. (1971). Extraordinary
Tales (New York: Herder and Herder)
Bower, T. R. G. (1966). The visual world of infants. Sci.
Amer., 215, 6, 80-92
Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and Communication
(Oxford: Pergamon Press)
Bruner, J. S. and Postman, L. J. (1949). On the perception
of incongruity: a paradigm. J. Person .. 18, 206-223
Cherry, E. C. (1957). On Human Communication (London:
Chapman & Hall)
Clark. W. C. (1969). Sensory decision theory analysis of the
placebo effect on the criteria for pain and thermal sensitivity (ff).J. Abn. Psychol., 74, 363-371
Douglas, M. (1973). Rules and Meanings (London: Penguin)
Frith, U. (1970). Studies in pattern detection in normal and
autistic children: I. Immediate recall of auditory sequences. J. Abnorm. Psychol., 76,412-420
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The Senses considered as Perceptual
Systems (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin)
and so attempts to apply it involve the denial of the
existence of people on the boundaries of the categories.
The occasionally ludicrous state of affairs that such
denial can lead to is seen in the apartheid system of
South Africa, by which the Japanese are classified as
white, and the Chinese as coloured.
The denial of objects at the boundaries of welldefined classes is a feature of normal perception, for
by assuming that objects fall into discrete groups we
have an economic and convenient description of the
world. Bruner and Postman (1949) briefly presented
playing cards to people. Among the real cards were
some with black hearts and red spades. The subjects
failed to notice these, reporting that they were normal
cards. Sometimes the denial was less complete and
subjects reported 'purple' spades and hearts.
My theme in this chapter has been that perception
is a process whereby we construct economic descriptions and models of the environment. This is done by
'discovering' relationships and patterns in the environment. The question as to whether these patterns
actually exist in the world probably has no meaning.
All that is required is that each person's model of the
world (composed of his expectations and the patterns
he sees) should be similar to the models of the people
he comes into contact with. Thus necessarily our
perception of the world is very much determined by
our culture and our society (Douglas, 1973).
Grodin, M. and Brown, D. R. (1967). Multivariate stimulus
processing by normal and paranoid schizophrenic subjects. Psychonomic Sci., 8, 525-526
Held, R. (1965). Plasticity in sensory-motor systems. Sci.
Amer., 213, 84-94
Hermelin, B. and O'Connor, N. (1967). Remembering of
words by psychotic and subnormal children. Brit. J.
Psychol., 58, 213-218
Hochberg, J. E. and McAllister, E. (1953). A quantitative
approach to figural 'goodness'. J. Exp. Psychol., 46,
361-364
Hubel, D. H. (1963). The visual cortex of the brain. Sci.
Amer., 209, 5, 54-62
Julesz, B. (1965). Texture and visual perception. Sci. Amer.,
212,2,38-48
KofIka, K. (1935). Principies of Gestalt Psychology (London: Kegan PaUl)
Lawson, J. S., McGhie, A. and Chapman, J. (1964). Perception of speech in schizophrenia. Brit. J. Psychiat., 110,375-380
Luria, A. R. (1969). The Mind of a Mnemonist (London:
Jonathan Cape)
Mackay, D. (1957). Moving visual images produced by
regular stationary patterns. Nature (London), 180,
849-850
Milner, B. and Teuber, H.-L. (1968). Alteration of perception and memory in man. In: BehaviourBI Change
(L. Weiskrantz, editor) (London: Harper & Row)
Moray, N. (1959). Attention in dichotic listening: Effective
cues and the influence of instructions. Quart. J. Exp.
Psycho/., 11,56-60
Mowbray, G. H. (1953). Simultaneous vision and audition:
comprehension of prose passages with varying levels of
difficulty. J. Exp. Psycho!., 46, 365-372
O'Connor, N. and Hermelin, B. (1967). The selective visual
attention of psychotic children.J. ChUdPsycho/. Psychiat.,
10,259-274
Restle, F. (1967). Grammatical analysis of the prediction of
binary events. J. Verb. Learn. Verb. Behav., 6, 17-25
Sarayay, S. M. and Pardes, H. (1967). Auditory elementary
hallucinations in alcohol withdrawal psychosis. Arch.
Gen. Psychiat., 16,652-658
Shepard, R. N. (1963). Analysis of proximitics as a technique for the study of information processing in man.
Human Factors, 5, 33-48
Perception 27
Silverman, G. (1972). The psycholinguistics of schizophrenic
language. Psycho/. Med., 2, 254-259
Tanner, W. P. Jr and Swets, J. A. (1954). A decision-making
theory of visual detection. Psycho/. Rev., 61, 4D 1-409
Treisman, A. M. (1961). Attention and Speech (Oxford
University: D. Phil. Thesis)
von Bekesy, G. (i 967). Sensory Inhibition (Princeton:
Princeton Univ. Press)
Yacorzynski, G. K. (1941). Perceptual principles involved in
the disintegration of a configuration formed in predicting
the occurrence of patterns selected by chance. J. Exp.
Psycho/., 29,401-406
Yarbus, A. L. (1967). Eye Movements and Vision (New
York: Plenum Press)
Yntema, D. B. and Trask, F. P. (1963). Recall as a search
process. J. Verb. Learn. Verb. Behav., 2, 65-74
Chapter 3
EMOTIONS
Irene D. Martin
In the study of human emotions it is important that
we distinguish carefully between the scientific observation of behaviour and the beliefs and faiths based on
personal experience, however beguiling and convincing these may seem. Our ancestors could understand the mysterious existence of rocks, rivers,
mountains, sun and stars by populating them with
gods and spirits, whose purposes were similar to
man's, and who were benign or hostile to him.
Primitive animism formulated this hypothesis with
complete credulity, filling nature with myth-figures
which continue to engage us in our literature.
Such a SUbjective interpretation is not limited to
inanimate nature: it extends to all kinds of animal
life. Virtues of persistence and generosity have been
attributed to forms of animal life from spiders to
chimpanzees. Our pets are seen as understanding and
'knowing' our feelings. The cunning of Brer Rabbit,
the homeliness of country mice, the wisdom of owls,
form the entertaining and almost inescapable themes
of nursery years.
It would be hasty to assume that modern culture
has really given up these subjective interpretations of
nature. It is still remarkably easy to see the actions of
people around us in terms of our own perception and
feelings; and remarkably difficult to consider alternative and more objective evidence.
Vocabulary of emotions
Literally hundreds of words are in everyday use which
describe the emotions. An exhaustive search of the
literature has shown the range to be very wide and in
fact so extensive that one may be unaware of the
precise shades of meaning involved. Consider depression and allied feeling states: sadness, melancholy,
low-spirits, unhappiness, despair, misery. The distinctions may be far from clear and we often tend to use
them synonymously. Conversely, we speak of love of
people, love of home, of country, of beauty, but these
feelings are distinguishably different. We therefore
need to ask such questions as: How meaningful are
these distinctions? How do we come to label different
emotions? Is it that they relate to different physiological states, or to the context in which we
experience them?
The evidence of the emotions
To apply the term 'emotional' either to ourselves or to
other people generally subsumes a complex set of
observations. So far as others are concerned there is
much evidence from overt behaviour. Facial expressions involving change in eyes, lips and muscles
can produce quite a different visage which in extreme
emotion we can judge fairly accurately. Voices alter
in pitch and intensity. Overt activity may occur, either
simple running or fighting or a range of more subtle
postural and gestural signals.
Another broad category of evidence comes from
physiological change. This is one of the least disputed
concomitants of many emotions. All writers, whether
literary or scientific, have agreed on the observation
of increased physiological activity: flushed face,
accelerated heart rate, raised blood pressure, trembling and increased muscle tension, dilated pupils,
shallow breathing, goose-flesh and visceral stirrings.
A final category of great, but essentially private,
significance is that of our own internal feelings and
perceptions. How we judge ourselves to feel, the
intensity and the quality, can be communicated to
others only through words.
These three broad categories are those to be considered and evaluated in any assessment of emotional
states. To them a category of another kind must be
added: the context or situation surrounding the individual, and which he judges to be provocative of particular types of feeling, whether of fear, anger or love.
Distinguishing emotion from other states
Before we distinguish among emotional states it is
appropriate to consider how we distinguish the state
of being emotional from other states. This raises the
question of definition-whether we can specify that
this state is 'emotional' and another state is not. In
practice this has proved to be extremely difficult:
outright emotions blend and blur with non-specific
states of excitement, interest, arousal and involvement
such as are experienced in activities like solving a
puzzle, listening to a talk, engaging in conversation.
In these states it can be shown that physiological
activity is elevated: EEGs may show all the signs of
arousal, there may be sweating, high heart rate,
raised levels of muscle tension. Yet some of the
components which would lead to a label of 'emotion'
are missing. The individual with high physiological
activation does not necessarily interpret this as
'feeling emotional'; this interpretation would seem
instead to relate to subjective appraisal of the
situation, whether for example it is perceived as
threatening and whether the individual feels able to
cope.
The transition from arousal to emotion can be
illustrated in the behaviour of the young child and in
playful, exploratory animals who will approach novel
objects to examine them. This approach is cautious
but does not seem to indicate fear; however, the
dividing line between exploration and fearful behaviour is very fine, and the young child may
suddenly run away screall}ing and in apparent terror
if the object makes a sudden movement or noise.
Presumably the evaluation of context as 'something
to be explored' has shifted to 'something to be
avoided'. Strictly speaking, we cannot say that his
feelings have shifted from curiosity to fear because we
have no access to internal states; the observations
rest with external behaviour.
Differentiating one emotionfrom another
It follows from this that in observational studies of
animals and children it is possible to differentiate
types of behaviour which can be classified in terms of
fighting, defence, feeding, exploring and so on, but it
is not possible to differentiate types of emotion
because part of the total pattern of valid emotional
responding is subjective experience. Without this
evidence we can only speak of emotional behaviour,
and this falls short of the total concept of emotion. It
might be the case that preverbal children and some
species of animals experience something like adult
emotion but this is very doubtful. It would imply that
different emotions are innate and fixed in quality,
whereas the argument to be presented is that a
lengthy process of learning and differentiating internal
states takes place throughout life, and that it is this
process which leads to the diversity of adult subjective
experience. That emotions are innate and fixed in
quality is, however, a viewpoint which from time to
time finds an exponent.
One of the first attempts to specify and list different
kinds of emotions was based on the then current
instinct theories (McDougall, 1912). McDougall
assumed a long list of instincts each with its own
associated emotion that was believed to be innate,
ready made to serve the instinct by providing the
appropriate driving force. Such assumptions do not
lend themselves to experimental verification. Another
influential view was that different emotional states
relate to a differential pattern of physiological activation. An attempt has been made to test this
empirically, with results suggesting that fear and
anger produce different cardiovascular patterns.
However, the evidence is relatively slight and very few
convincing studies have emerged, not surprisingly, for
if emotion is expressed in the components- of the
overt-motor, physiological and cognitive-verbal
systems, the resulting response configuration could
permit some very subtle permutations. It still remains
Emotions 29
a possibility that one day specific physiological
patterns, specific cognitive patterns, and specific
behavioural patterns, in association with given eliciting conditions, will be identified and shown to be
organised in such a way as to clearly distinguish one
emotional state from another (Lazarus, 1968).
MEASUREMENT OF EMOTION
1. Methods of assessing overt behaviour
One of the most common though rather global
methods is that of rating overt behaviour in terms of
some general criterion, for example, anxiety, depression, affection, hostility. Teachers are often required
to assess a child's degree of emotional disturbance,
assertiveness, sociability or co-operativeness. This
kind of general assessment presumably makes use of
a compfex of observed items of behaviour, usually in
a rather limited range of situations, and it involves
complex judgements on the part of the rater. It is an
occupation we all take part in, whether professionally
or socially, and it is essential that anyone required to
assess the behaviour of another person be aware of
the factors which can influence the assessment. These
have been described in detail by Eysenck (1969) and
will be briefly mentioned here. They are:
(i) Differential understanding of trait names. For
example, do the terms persistence, kindness, anxious
and depress«d mean the same to different judges?
(ii) The Halo effect. Whether we like (or dislike)
someone, admire or despise them, is likely to colour
all the judgements made of their behaviour-we may
unwittingly attribute all the virtues to our friends and
vices to our enemies.
(iii) Differences in rating ability. Persons who rate
others may differ with respect to their ability to carry
out this task.
(iv) Influence of unconscious bias. Biases for or
against certain traits in others may be deeply rooted
in the personality organisation of the rater.
(v) Influence of acquaintanceship. Contrary to
common belief, relatively superficial knowledge seems
to give better predictive as:curacy than more thorough
knowledge.
(vi) Raters' preconceptions. Kendell (1968) has
shown how psychiatric ratings df clinical features of
depression .are significantly affected by raters' preconceptions about the classification of depressive
illnesses (whether there are two distinct entities or
only one) in such a way as to conform with, and
so confirm, these opinions.
With so many factors influencing the rating it is not
surprising that reliability between ratings, either made
by the same person at different times or by different
people on the same occasion, tends to be rather low.
It also seems to be the case that self-ratings, e.g. of
anxiety or depression, are not always highly concordant with ratings by observers: we do not always see
ourselves as others see us.
30 Basic processes
The judgement of whether a person or child is
'affectionate' or co-operative is obviously a highly
complicated one and limited to the samples of
behaviour which we are able to observe. It is simpler
to measure more specific components of behaviour
such as smiling, amount of time spent in playing,
crying, vocalisation, and so on. These can be fairly
precisely defined among a group of observers, criteria
decided on, and checks made on the measures
obtained. This indeed is the position which contemporary ethologists have moved towards in their
detailed observation of animal behaviour in natural
surroundings. The more general (Le. non-specific)
observational studies which characterised the earlier
work and which have been described in a number of
popular books (e.g. Tinbergen, 1953, on the herring
gull; Lorenz, 1967, on geese and fish and Jane van
Lawick-Goodall, 1971, on chimpanzees) have since
been much elaborated into careful and detailed
monitoring of specifiable elements of behaviour.
Ethologists frequently draw analogies from animal
to human behaviour on the grounds that humans are,
after all, members of the animal kingdom and are
descended through evolutionary processes from
animals, and possess the same or similar sensory and
neural equipment. Quite naturally they tend to emphasise the role of innate mechanisms-the view that
organisms come into the world already equipped with
behaviour programmes. This would mean that they
have been programmed in the course of their
phylogeny (the evolution of the species) and that
their behaviour patterns are innate just like the
physical structures th!!y are born with. With this
assumption in mind, it is a short step to apply the
findings and explanations based on sex and aggression
in fish, birds and apes, to man. Lorenz, for example,
in discussing aggressive behaviour in the defence of
territorial rights and pointing out the various inhibitory mechanisms which restrain aggression when
animals live together in social groups, comments as
follows:
'Every fish knew the owners of neighbouring territories very exactly and tolerated them peacefully at
closest quarters, while he immediately attacked every
stranger which approached his spawning hollow even
from farther away.'
This peacefulness, it is postulated, is dependent on
individual recognition of their fellows, and this nonaggressive pact of neighbours 'resembles true friendship'. Lorenz then continues with a beguiling analogy
from human behaviour:
• Among human beings this phenomenon can
regularly be observed in railway carriages, incidentally an excellent place in which to study the function
of aggression in the spacing out of territories. All the
rude behaviour patterns serving for the repulsion of
seat-competitors and intruders, such as covering
empty places with coats or bags. putting up one's
feet, or pretending to be asleep, are brought into
action against the unknown individual only. As soon
as the newcomer turns out to be even the merest
acquaintance they disappear and are replaced by
rather shamefaced politeness.'
Ethological studies are fascinating to read and it is
an intriguing exercise to make comparisons between
human and animal behaviour. They have made us
sensibly aware of the many comparable situations
which we share in common with other animals.
Analogies have an important role in science, but they
require careful handling; vital differences must not be
glossed over. To use these examples as complete
explanations of human behaviour is to ignore many
other factors, not the least being the possession of
language and the role of thinking, which make any
simple-minded use of analogies exceedingly misleading.
The technique of detailed behavioural sampling used
by ethologists is, however, a valid and informative
approach to the study of behaviour, especially when
its elements can be carefully defined. It has been
successfully applied to human studies, especially of
young infants and children. Fears in infants are
particularly interesting since they throw light on
emotional, cognitive and social development. Fear of
strangers (which in human infants usually appears in
the second half of the first year of life and may extend
long into the second year) can be studied by measuring such elements as the infant's facial expression
(smiling, frowning, etc.), visual fixation, vocalisation,
and motor activity in response to different types of
strangers. In a controlled environment it is possible to
examine analytically the effects of various factors on
the child's fears, for example the size of the stranger,
the sex, the proximity to the infant. One such study
found, for example, that whereas the faCial response
was positive to the self (viewed in a mirror), and to
mother and a strange child, it was negative to a
strange male and female; further, the intensity of the
reactions (either positive or negative) increased with
closeness (Lewis and Brooks-Gunn, 1972).
One modern interpretation of the fear of strangers
phenomenon is in terms of the massive learning and
cognitive development which takes place in the young
child. As we proceed along the phylogenetic scale
learning becomes more important for the survival of
the organism. The child has to learn to differentiate
self from non-self, to discriminate the strange and the
novel from th" familiar. Hebb (1946) has suggested
that fear occurs when an object is seen which is like
familiar objects in enough respects to arouse habitual
processes of perception, but in other respects arouses
incompatible processes, and there is considerable
evidence in infant studies (reviewed by Zegans and
Zegans, 1972) to support the hypothesis that cognitive conflict affects emotional behaviour. This
cognitive approach stresses the interaction between
the infant's past and present experience; it stresses
that the child's response to the 'strange' is a part of its
larger emerging cognitive functions.
A point worth making in connection with some of
these psychological studies is the methodological
sophistication of the data analyses which are carried
out. In infant/mother studies, for example, it is
essential to study the interaction within the 'dyad' as
this two-person relationship is termed. This matrix
of maternal and infant behaviours involves the effect
(for example) of vocalisation by A on vocalisation by
B; or of vocalisation by A on the emotional response
of B and the effect of this response back on A. Appropriate statistical analyses of this communication
network are possible. The value of this approach is
that a genuine two-way interaction can be assessed
(Lewis and Freedle, 1972).
Some ethologists have extended their naturalistic
approach to human behaviour in different societies
and cultures. It becomes evident in human groups that
social interactions and the means of smoothing social
relationships assume great importance. These have
been examined under such headings as territoriality,
aggression, sexual, affiliative and group behaviour;
Eibl-Eibesfeldt (I971), for example, illustrates the
variety of greeting behaviours which are observed in
different nations and interprets them in terms of their
role in establishing a bond and appeasing aggression.
Posture and gesture are seen in this context as
forms of expressive behaviour which are useful in
social interaction as non-verbal means of conveying
information. It is argued that the role of certain
postures such as bowing, curtsying, falling to one's
knees, etc. is that of making oneself small and thereby
appeasing. This is the precise opposite of threatening
behaviour and as such, ethologists suggest, is a
central function of social rites. Threatening postures
typically involve making oneself larger, often by
raising the shoulders. Among primates for example,
those small muscles are tensed which make the hairs
on arms, back and shoulders stand erect. This in the
chimpanzee leads to bristling of the fur which strikingly alters its appearance.
These field studies are interesting and useful
reminders that social behaviour may have innate
origins. They are· supplemented by a quite independent set of studies which have been carried out on
factors influencing social interaction, largely within
the laboratory or controlled environment. Argyle
(1969) has presented in a very readable and comprehensive way the varieties of non-verbal behaviour
which occur in social situations such as meeting a
strange person, being interviewed, performing before
an audience, and in social structures such as being in
prison or hospital. These behavioural elements
include bodily contact, proximity, posture, facial and
gestural movements, direction of gaze, and nonverbal aspects of speech. They are related not only to
Emotions 31
the type of situation, but the organisation of the group
and the individual's perception and personality, and
Argyle illustrates how they are modified by the
different kinds of social encounter.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1 (a) The display face is shown by aggressive
chimpanzees, especially during their charging displays or
when attacking others.
(b) A full closed grin (upper and lower front teeth showing, but with jaws closed), is the expression of a chimpanzee
who is probably less frightened or excited than one showing
an open grin (upper and lower front teeth showing, jaws
open). 'If the human nervous or social smile has its
equivalent expression in the chimpanzee it is, without
doubt, the closed grin' (Jane van Lawick-Goodall, 1971).
(From Jane van Lawick-Goodall, 1971, by courtesy of
Collins)
32 Basic processes
Facial expression
Can the face provide accurate information about
emotion? This simple question, the answer to which
may seem patently obvious on an intuitive basis, has
baffled investigators for many decades. Earlier studies
suffered from many methodological deficiencies and
technical prcblems, and a variety of approaches has
been tried out and discussed, e.g. the relative merit of
motion (film or videotape) and still (photograph)
records of facial behaviour; whether ratings should be
made for specific types of emotions (fear, anger,
sadness, disgust, etc.) or should aim to distinguish
dimensions of feeling (such as pleasant/unpleasant,
attention/rejection, positive/negative social attitude).
Recent reviews of this area (Ekman et aI., 1972)
conclude that when people look at the faces of other
people, they can obtain information about happiness,
fear, anger, disgust/contempt, interest and sadness.
They can also describe the information they obtain in
terms of dimensions such as pleasant-to-unpleasant,
active-to-passive, and intense-to-controlled. Impressions about whether someone is angry, happy, sad,
etc. can be related to particular movements and positions of the face.
Darwin was one of the earliest writers to draw
attention to expressive movements of the face and
ethologists since then have shown that these facial
expressions are meaningful in that they convey
accurate information of intention to other members of
the species (Figure 3.1). Signs of threat, attack and
submission seem well-understood and have been
discussed in terms of ' sign stimuli' which are instantly
recognised and activate the appropriate kind of
strategic reaction (van Lawick-Goodall, 1971).
However, the study of facial behaviour in man in
naturalistic settings has many difficulties: we wear our
own masks in most social situations, and typically
inhibit the direct expression of feeling. Ekman et at.
(1972) hypothesise that there are culture-specific
display rules, which dictate how facial behaviour is to
be managed in particular social settings; and that this
masking can be achieved in a variety of ways, by
fragmenting the facial behaviour so that movements
are seen in only one facial area rather than the whole;
by time reduction, so that facial behaviour is visible
for a brief instant; or by a miniaturisation, so that the
excursion of the facial muscular movements is
lessened.
Vocalisation: non-verbal aspects of speech
Much of the communication involved in speech goes
on at a non-verbal level: how it is said rather than
what is said. To take an extreme case: 'Yes' can be
voiced to mean 'No'! Emotional tone is one of the
most primitive aspects of speech; animals communicate their emotional states by sounds, and so in
effect do humans. This is not the main conscious
purpose of speech, in adults at least, but it is an
important part of the message that gets across. These
vocal characteristics can be described in terms of
physical characteristics such as rate, pitch and timing;
more elaborate measures include frequency distribution, and voice quality (e.g. resonant, breathy,
quavery). Counts of speech errors can be made, but
it is difficult to find a standard measuring situation
since they are sensitive to audience effects and
difficulty of material.
While research into vocalisation and emotion is
continuing," the assumption that it would be. possible
to translate emotions into non-verbal cues has been
proved difficult in practice. Much of this kind of
research is reviewed by Argyle (1969) and Davitz
(1964).
Eye contact
Eye contact behaviour, that is to say the duration of
eye gaze, has been studied as part of the expressive
Figure 3.2 Flirting Samburu girl. She makes contact
with the eyes, lowers her eyelids, then looks away. The
ritualised flight is confined to the eye movements. It is
no more than hinted at in the head movements. (From
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1971, by courtesy of Methuen)
movements occurring in social interaction. Several
differing processes seem to be involved in gazedirection. In the first place A may look at B to try to
establish a relationship, and will look more if he or
she wants to establish a closer relationship of some
kind (Figure 3.2).
In this case eye contact is sought, but too much of
it creates anxiety. A prolonged stare seems to be
interpreted as threatening and is rated as being very
discomforting (Exline, 1971). It may also be used to
try to establish a dominant relationship.
Argyle (1969) has outlined the ways in which
looking at another person, together with other signals,
can be used to establish different kinds of relationship.
These other signals include facial expression (smiling,
frowning, etc.), pupillary changes and physical proximity. Research at the Institute of Psychiatry in
London has shown that anxious people tend to
minimise eye contact by looking away from the
experimt:nter. This is only evident under the stressful
condition of a prolonged stare by the experimenter,
and not during a relaxed period of conversation.
This section has illustrated some of the studies
using observational techniques of overt behaviour in
naturalistic settings and also some of the laboratory
research which has aimed to measure behaviour more
analytically. It raises a number of methodological and
interpretative problems, some of which can be summarised as follows.
The biases of raters have been discussed, and there
is considerable evidence that these biases significantly
affect judgement. We should do well to be aware of
our own! A more difficult factor to come to terms
with is the great selectivity of perception which
narrows informational input to the individual. What
dimensions or categories are relevant will depend on
the culture, the situation, the motivation and personality of the perceiver. Thus a religious enthusiast wants to know if people are saved or not,
a political enthusiast which side they are on, a snob
which class they belong to, and so on.
In this section there have also been examples of
analogies of behaviour from different species of
animal to man. These must be scrutinised carefully,
as much for what they omit as for what they include.
The dangers of anthropomorphism---of attributing to others (especially animals) the kinds of feelings and motives we experience ourselves-are ever
present.
Quite obviously all the elements of behaviour which
have been discussed convey signals and information,
both to other animals of the same species and to the
observer. Some of this information-the way it is
given and the way it is interpreted-seems largely
innately determined. But there is overwhelming
evidence for the role of learning. Adults have been
exposed to a very long learning process in which
different elements of overt behaviour may be inhibited.
Thus behaviour becomes fragmented-fear and anger
may be experienced but perhaps rarely or never
expressed in direct fearful and aggressive behaviour.
Grief may be great, yet no tears allowed.
Whether overt reactions occur or not, there seems
little doubt that underlying the behavioural signals
there is a substratum of physiological activity which
bears a complex and significant relationship to
emotional experience.
2. Physiological concomitants of emotion
In considering this type of measurement we move to a
set of studies which in general are characterised by
complete objectivity of recording methods, a high
degree of technical skill, and which are typically
laboratory-based and involve controlled experimentation.
The fact of bodily involvement in emotion is widely
recognised. Its manifestations are diffuse. 'Researches
5
~ 4
" .
--- "
~ • 0 7 %
~
---
--'- '0
II
'2 ---
'" 2
; '" J
3
SPINAL CORO
Emotions 33
E'E
LACRIMAL GLAND
MuCOuS MEMSRANE
OF NOSE ANO PALATE.
SUBMAXILLARy GLAND
SUBLINGUAL GLAND
MUCOUS MEMBRANE Of MOUTH
PARono GLAND
HEART
lARVNX
fFlACH~
LUNGS
ESOPHAGUS
STOMACH
ABDOMINAL
BLOOD VESSEI.S
UVEA AN 0 DUCTS
PANCREAS
$MAU,. tNTI:$TINf
LARGIE INTESl1N(
RECTUM
ADRENAL
KIDNEY
BlADDER
SEXUAL ORGANS
EXTERNAL GENITAUA
Figure 3.3 The autonomic nervous system is represented
in this diagram. Parasympathetic fibres arise from the
brain and sacral vertebrae. The sympathetic branches
arise from the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae
... have shown that not only the heart, but the entire
circulatory system, forms a sort of sounding-board,
which every change of our consciousness, however
slight, may make reverberate. Hardly a sensation
comes to us without sending waves of alternate
constriction and dilation down the arteries of our
arms. The blood-vessels of the abdomen act recipro-
34 Basic processes
cally with those of the more outward parts. The
bladder and bowels, the glands of the mouth, throat
and skin, and the liver, are known to be affected
gravely in certain severe emotions, and are unquestionably affected transientJy when the emotions
are of a lighter sort. That the heart -beats and the
rhythm of breathing play a leading part in all
emotions whatsoever is a matter too notorious for
proof.' This quotation is from James (1890) and
illustrates a pre-experimental viewpoint which has
proved amply justified.
Many experiments have since provided data for the
hypothesis that emotionality is related to excitability
of the autonomic nervous system. Its role in
emotional states was intensively examined by Cannon
(1929). He recognised that the extensiveness and wide
distribution of sympathetic nerve fibres permit diffuse
action throughout the body, whereas the cranial and
sacral divisions of the parasympathetic system with
their restricted distributions allow for more specific
action (Figure 3.3). He assigned to the cranial
division the role of conserver of bodily energies; to the
sacral division a group of mechanisms for emptying,
while to the antagonistic sympathetic division he
assigned an 'emergency' function. Pain, the major
emotions fear and rage, and also intense excitement,
are manifested in the activities of the sympathetic
nervous division. When in these states, impulses are
discharged over the neurones of this division to
produce all the changes typical of sympathetic
excitation.
Cannon also showed how closely related are the
effects of the sympathetic nervous system and adrenal
secretion. Epinephrine, secreted from the adrenal
medulla, is extraordinarily effective in minute amounts
and affects the structures innervated by the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system just
as if they were receiving nervous impulses. Emotional
excitement thus results in sympathetic (neural) discharges both to peripheral structures and to the
adrenal medulla. This leads to the secretion of
hormones, in particular adrenaline (or epinephrine as
it is sometimes called) which has similar effects to the
neural stimulation of sympathetic fibres, but on a
longer time base. Thus sympathetic effects are automatically augmented and prolonged through direct
chemical action on the organs themselves.
To summarise, the importance of Cannon's work
was his experimental approach in linking emotional
behaviour with precisely measured physiological
effects. The utility of these bodily changes was
discussed in terms of mobilising the organism for
prompt and.efficient struggle.
The relevance of sympathetic activity to emotional
experience becomes evident when we review the
effects of sympathetic activity on end organs. Salivation is reduced or stopped; movement of the
stomach, secretion of gastric juices and peristaltic
movements of the intestines are all inhibited. These
effects together slow down digestion. They also
interfere with normal parasympathetic functions,
giving rise to defaecation and urination. Changes in
the circulatory system also take place. Sympathetic
impulses to the heart make it beat faster. They also
cause constriction of the blood vessels of the gut and
control blood flow in such a way as to direct more
blood to brain and skeletal muscle mass. The impulses
of the sympathetic neurones, as indicated by their
dominance over the digestive process, are capable of
readily overwhelming the conditions established by
the parasympathetic division of the autonomic
nervous system.
Many of the bodily effects of sympathetic arousal
can be detected from the surface of the body by
means of appropriate transducers and high gain
amplifiers. Active brain, muscles, heart, sweat glands
~--------------~,------------~~
Figure 3.4 Sample of p ychophysiological recordings.
From top to bottom: tachograph (heart rate changes),
EKG, event marker (stimulus = a tone), respiration, palmar
skin resistance, and plethysmograph (blood volume change
in the ear lobe). A respiratory rhythm can be seen superimpo ed on the latter
and many other structures produce small voltages
which can readily be picked up by means of
appropriately situated electrodes placed on the skin.
These small impulses are amplified to produce the
recordings illustrated in Figure 3.4.
One of the most popular measures of the psychological laboratory is palmar skin resistance. This is
closely associated with sweat gland activity and is
extremely sensitive to changes in level of arousal, and
to novelty and stress. Polygraph recordings of this
and other physiological measures are becoming
reasonably commonplace in psychological laboratories and are increasingly contributing to our
understanding of human emotions, especially anxiety.
It should be possible in the near future to employ
existing techniques of telemetric recording (usually
radio transmitted signals from individuals in free
situations, i.e. not confined by wires and leads to
apparatus in the laboratory) in psychological and
psychiatric studies. It would then be possible to
record from an agoraphobic patient, for example, in
the real setting of his fear. As yet, however, psychophysiological studies are virtually confined to the
laboratory, and this necessarily introduces an element
of artificiality into the situation. Since it is not possible
to induce strong emotions such as fear in those who
volunteer to be subjects, experiments are carried out
in 'analogue' situations, i.e. those of mild fear or
unpleasantness, by using unpleasant sensory stimuli
such as harsh tones, or by comparing groups of
anxious subjects with non-anxious subjects in certain
mildly stressful situations like solving problems,
coping with distraction, etc. Physiological reactivity
in the two groups (anxious v. non-anxious, stressed v.
unstressed) can then be compared. Results of various
psychophysiological studies in the context of psychiatric disorders have been reviewed by Martin
(1973), and in the context of treatment by desensitisation by Mathews (1971).
In recent years, other classes of compounds have
been implicated in various affective states, including
normal and pathological anxiety, depression, elation
and anger. These include the catecholamines, epinephrine and norepinephrine, and the indole amine,
serotonin. While norepinephrine functions as a
chemical transmitter substance at the terminals of the
peripheral sympathetic nervous system, the role of
this and other amines in the central nervous system
is far from clear. It has been suggested that norepinephrine and serotonin may each function directly
as a transmitter substance in the central nervous
system, though none of the biogenic amines has yet
been definitely established as a chemical neurotransmitter in the brain (see Schildkraut and Kety,
1967, for a review of this area).
Many of the experiments mentioned above (and all
of Cannon's) were carried out on infra-human
animals, often cats. The results of decades of experimental work with human subjects, while confirming
time and time again the involvement of physiological
reactivity in emotion, have nevertheless increased
rather than reduced the puzzles and the problems.
The dissociation mentioned earlier between behaviour
and emotion (that an emotion might be felt strongly
but not expressed in any way) is also found between
physiological variables. It had been expected on the
basis of the 'mass action' of the sympathetic division
of the autonomic nervous system that all measures of
sympathetic activity would relate highly with one
another, i.e. an increase in one measure would be
reflected by increases in others. Contrary to this
assumption, the physiological reaction shows idiosyncratic patterning, one person responding more in
Emotions 35
one specific measure (say increased blood pressure)
and relatively little in other measures, while another
person evinces a high degree of sweating, and yet
another elevated levels of muscle tension. It is possible
that this patterning of reaction is a function of the
relatively stress-free atmosphere of the laboratory,
and that all systems would be equally elevated in a
real-life stress. It is also possible that some degree of
patterning really does exist and is related to specific
symptom areas as found in psychosomatic illnesses.
Research which has been carried out on symptoms
such as backache and headache seems to suggest a
fairly localised muscle tension: muscles in the
symptom areas are excessively tense while other
muscle groups remain relatively relaxed.
Another factor to be briefly mentioned is the
nature of the measurements which are made from the
physiological recordings. It is usual to refer to
'elevated' physiological reactivity, i.e. to the intensity
or amplitude of a particular reaction, but there are
other characteristics which can be measured but which
are often ignored. In a given situation people may
react physiologically at different latencies (short or
long) for different durations, and they may take a
longer or shorter time for the physiological reaction
to subside. This persistence of reaction is not perhaps
very meaningful in the laboratory situation, but
differences in timing have been noted in the few reallife stress studies which have been carried out.
Experienced v. inexperienced parachutists differ, for
example, in their temporal patterning of heart-rate
reactions prior to jumping (Epstein, 1967).
Another limiting factor in psychophysiological
studies is their failure to take account of the role of
pituitary-adrenal involvement in the stress response
of human subjects. Measurement problems are of
course formidable, but it should be recognised that
not only the adrenal medulla but the adrenal cortex
has been discussed in the context of emotion and
stress (see, for example, Selye 1956). Thus the
overall physiological pattern occurring in emotion and
prolonged stress is likely to be very complicated
indeed; and, within any general pattern which may
eventually be elucidated, it will certainly be the case
that individuals will differ in many characteristics.
Eysenck (1967) has postulated that neurotic/anxious
subjects tend to inherit a more reactive sympathetic
nervous system, and hence personality characteristics
which determine stress thresholds and stress
tolerance; a similar case has been made out for
biochemical individuality (Williams, 1956). These
factors, combined with the effects which learning may
have on the individual elements of the overall
emotional response, suggest that we are far from an
adequate measurement of the physiological response
pattern of emotion. '
Granted that physiological changes occur, how
does the individual perceive them within hims~f?
36 Basic processes
Results of research in this area suggest, perhaps
surprisingly, that people do not judge their internal
states very precisely. Even physiological events which
might seem obvious, like a markedly increased heart
rate or level of muscle tension, are not always
accurately rated. The evidence suggests that perception of bodily change and actual bodily change are
not perfectly related, and that individuals may be
hyporesponsive or hyperresponsive to particular kinds
of change. It has been postulated that obese
individuals, for example, may be unresponsive to
hunger-induced bodily changes in the sense of not
using them to define hunger or to initiate eating.
This concern with the perception of bodily changesgives rise to an interesting set of questions. What does
an individual do when he does perceive bodily
change? That is to say, what does he do with this
information? Common sense tell us that novel
information about ourselves is not disregarded. We
think about it and attempt to understand it. This
evaluative process is a crucial factor in recent
cognitive theories of emotion. In an etTort to deal with
the inadequacies of a purely visceral or physiological
formulation of emotion, several researchers have
proposed that cognitive factors may be major determinants of emotional states. Given a state of physiological arousal it has been suggested that one labels,
interprets and identifies this stirred-up state in terms
of the characteristics of the precipitating situation.
Thus it is argued that emotional experience is jointly
determined by the perception and labelling of bodily
changes.
3. Verbal methods: questionnaires, scales,
self-reports
Any adequate account of human emotion must take
into account the individual's description of his
SUbjective feelings. These are often freely described in
the clinical interview situation, but for experimental
purposes methods of categorising and quantifying the
verbal material have been devised. These include
questionnaire responses, adjective check lists and
mood scales, as well as some of the structured
interviews which typically occur in many experiments.
In mood scales the subject is usually required to
describe his feelings by endorsing from a large list
of adjectives (angry, bored, tired, relaxed, etc.) those
that apply to him. Even quite simply the subject may
be asked to rate himself along a hypothetical continuum. For example, a mood scale of depression
might include a scale ranging from 'feeling cheerful,
on top of the world' at one end, to 'feeling unhappy
and utterly miserable' at the other end. A scale of fear
might ask the subject to rate a particular fear along a
continuum of 0 as no fear at all to 100 as the most
frightened he has ever been. The idea behind these
scales is that of a standardised format, to help the
subject describe his own feelings. They have been
used in demonstrating changes in attitude with forms
of psychotherapy, change in emotional responsiveness
to frightening films and in reflecting the effects of
drugs.
The typical questionnaire contains fairly specific
statements about the individual's behaviour. An
anxiety scale, for example, might contain such
questions as: Do you sutTer from sleeplessness? Do
you worry about your health? Items in such scales
usually refer to typical behaviour, to generally feeling
tense, often having difficulty in sleeping, etc. In this
sense they are used to refer to a personality trait, i.e.
a relatively persistent, long-lasting aspect of a person's
nature. We may also need to know how a person is
feeling now. Granted that he has a trait of anxiety,
that is to say he tends to be an anxious person and
this tends to be manifested in many ditTerent situations, does he feel anxious right now. Such a
question refers to the individual's current state. Trait
and state aspects of personality measurements do not
always coincide; however anxious in general, we may
right now feel relaxed. Many personality scales have
been designed with the 'state' measure in mind, and
they require answers concerning the individual's
current state of feeling.
There have been many criticisms of these methods
of assessing emotional states. Many of the items
included in these lists are selected quite arbitrarily. A
person who scores high on an anxiety scale may also
score high on a depression scale or a scale of
hysteria, simply because the scales include haphazardly grouped items which were just guessed at in
the first place. The a priori construction of questionnaires and the naive notion that because a
questionnaire is given a particular label it therefore
measures that particular trait have had to be
abandoned. Very careful validation techniques and
statistical analyses are required to sort out this kind
of problem.
Eysenck (1969) has tried to structure the whole
field of personality in terms of independent dimensions. Three major dimensions have been
described to date: neuroticism, introversion-extroversion and psychoticism. Items which characterise
neuroticism (or emotional instability) include nervousness, depression, inferiority feelings, etc. The
neurotic is hypochondriacal, worried, excitable and
impatient. Differentiated emotional states are seen
within this dimensional framework: the introverted
neurotic, for example, is predisposed to sutTer anxiety
and depression.
Other criticisms which have been raised concern
subjects' biases (e.g. the tendency to answer 'yes' or
'no' to all questions), age and sex factors, and the
observation that subjects may deliberately fake their
answers. Modern questionnaires have gone a long
way towards coping with these difficulties. A great
deal of statistical and experimental expertise have
gone into their construction, their reliability and
validity. Nevertheless, questionnaire responses must
be interpreted with care; they provide useful information, out this is probably most profitably considered
alongside other sources of information, especially the
physiological and the behavioural.
Cognitive/perceptual/actors
The preceding section has dealt with relatively
straightforward questions and responses concerning
the subject's typical behaviour and his immediate
feeling states. We move now towards. a set of cognitive/peripheral factors which while of undeniable
significance are more elusive of definition and
measurement.
It is apparent that human subjects not only
selectively perceive the world around, but make
judgements and evaluations, deliberate about alternative solutions to problems, make plans, and try to
cope with difficult situations by means of different
plans and strategies. A number of studies have been
carried out to examine how these factors affect
behaviour.
Several writers have discussed emotion in terms of
the individual's perception and appraisal of his
situation. Arnold (1960) defines emotion as the felt
tendency toward anything intuitively appraised as
good (beneficial) and away from anything intuitively
appraised as bad (harmful); this attraction or
aversion is accompanied by a pattern of physiological
changes organised toward approach or withdrawal.
The appraisal process is described as direct,
immediate and intuitive, not the result of reflection or
deliberation.
This view that one of the primary evaluations of a
stressful situation is in terms of the threat which it
poses the individual has also been proposed by
Emotions 37
Lazarus (1968), who has carried out a long series of
studies on this basis. He distinguishes a primary and
a secondary appraisal, the first based on the immediate situational confrontation and the evaluation by the
individual of its harmful or beneficial significance; the
second within the context of the coping strategies
which are employed. These are illustrated in
Table 3.1
Meichenbaum (1972) illustrates the relationship
between the individual's self-evaluatory statements
and his level of anxiety in a situation of public
speaking, during which some members ofthe audience
walk out of the room, on two different speakers, both
possessing essentially the same speaking skills.
This exodus elicits different self-statements from
high v. low speech-anxious speakers. The high speechanxious individual is more likely to say to himself: 'I
must be boring. How much longer do 1 have to
speak? 1 knew 1 never could give a speech' and so
forth. These self-statements engender anxiety and
become self-fulfilling prophecies. On the other hand,
the low speech-anxious individual is more likely to
view the audience's departure as a sign of rudeness or
to attribute their leaving to external considerations.
He is more likely to say something like: 'They must
have a class to catch. Too bad they have to leave;
they will miss a good talk'.
Such self-statements are often implicit, and may
need to be made explicit in order for retraining of
more positive attitudes to take place. A related aspect
of performance is the individual's judgement of how
he feels he has coped with a stressful situation, once
he has acted. Was it well done? Does he feel a failure?
Many appraisals and reappraisals take place as we
think over past actions. The wider problem is often
what constitutes coping adaptive beha~iour in relation
to the values which are held.
One extreme of coping behaviour (its absence) has
Table 3.1 Sources of information contributing to primary and secondary appraisal. (From Lazarus, 1966, by
courtesy of McGraw-Hill)
Factors in stress configuration
contributing to appraisals
Factors within physiological structure
contributing to appraisals
Primary appraisal
(based on nature of
harmful corifrontation)
Threat or non-threat
1. Balance of power between harm
and counterharm resources
2. Imminence of confrontation
3. Ambiguity of stimulus cues concerning harm
I. Motive strength and pattern
2. Several belief systems conc(lrning
transactions with environment
3. Intellectual resources, education,
and sophistication
Coping
Secondary appraisal
(based on consequences
of action tendencies)
I. Location of agent of harm
2. Viability of alternative coping
.actions
3. Situational constraints
*Degree of threat
1. Motive strength and pattern
(because of potential sacrifices
entailed in any action)
2. Ego resources
3. Coping dispositions
* Belongs neither in stimulus configuration nor physiological structure but is a complex, intervening product of both.
38 Basic processes
b~en illustrated in studies carried out on dogs. When
a dog receives traumatic electric shock which cannot
be predicted and from which there is no escape it
eventually seems to give up and passively accept the
shock. Seligman et al. (1971) refer to this form of
passive behaviour as 'learned helplessness'. Many of
these dogs who are subsequently given the opportunity to escape from shock fail to learn to do so, and
Seligman argues that these animals become passive in
the face of trauma. Extending his argument on
learned helplessness to human behaviour, he suggests
that depressive patients feel helpless, hopeless and
powerless because they have learned (or believe) that
they cannot control those elements of their lives which
relieve sutTering and bring gratification. In short they
believe they are helpless. The detailed analogy which
Seligman otTers is couched in learning theory terms,
and on this basis he has suggested various ways of
modifying the 'helpless' behaviour.
The role of cognitive and coping factors is being
increasingly explored in ditTerent kinds of therapeutic
situations. There is a rapidly expanding group of
studies in which the many attributes of fears, especially fears of fairly specific objects like small animals,
are carefully investigated. Self-reports of fear are
obtained, together with physiological recordings to
phobic and neutral stimuli, and observations of the
subject's overt response to the feared object (i.e.
degree of approach/avoidance, etc.). The self-reports
often include information concerning the subject's
perception and evaluation both of the situation and
the degree to which he feels he is coping with it (Lang,
1968). This group of studies is closely related to
various kinds of therapies, and they have often
attempted to evaluate the success of specific treatments in terms of their etTects on the components of
fear.
Some of the specifically cognitive-oriented research
into emotion is primarily concerned with the nature
of the stimulus or situational etTects which are
involved in producing emotional reactivity. It has
frequently been observed that man and infra-human
animals react negatively to events that deviate from
what they have adapted or habituated to. Information
conflict arises when a previously laid down neutral
pattern is set against a stimulus similar to, but not the
same as one experienced in the past. Explanations
have been given in terms of the organism maintaining
some more or less optimal level of arousal and
cortical activity. Stimulus variables such as novelty,
incongruity and surprise which are mild or moderate
in degree are likely to elicit orienting/arousal reactions, interest and possibly exploratory behaviour.
Extremely intense stimuli on the other hand usually
provoke defensive reactions such as rigidity, startle
and flight (Figure 3.5).
Most of the arousal level hypotheses are essentially
theories of tension reduction. Deviations from optimal
'0
E
.,
-5
~ :.c
'iii
o "' c.
o
c:
o
'B
c:
.2
.,
" u
'0
a;
.3
Optimal level of
response and learning
Increasing emotional
disturbance, anxiety
Level of arousal function (nonspecific cortical bombardment)
Figure 3.5 Relationship between the 'cue function' of
stimuli which guide behaviour, and the general 'arousal
function' of stimuli which energise behaviour. Cortical
(cue) function is facilitated by the diffuse bombardment of
the arousal system up to an optimum. Beyond this, as at
the right, the greater bombardment may interfere with the
delicate adjustments involved in cue function. Thus there
will be an optimal level of arousal for effective behaviour.
(From Hebb, 1955, by courtesy of Psychol. Rev.)
arousal levels create tension and discomfort which
motivate the organism towards efforts at their
removal. Such theories imply a kind of homeostatic
or equilibrium principle.
Many specific problems along these lines have
been examined by experimental research in this area,
and the issue in the present context is the extent to
which such cognitive factors atTect an emotion like
anxiety. Does a statement like 'I have failed' engender more anxiety and hence increased physiological arousal; and conversely a statement like 'I
can convince myself to do it. I can reason my fear
away' reduce anxiety and physiological arousal? The
extent to which this type of modification can occur,
and the type of learning procedures which it implies,
will be dealt with in greater detail in the following
chapter. The point to emphasise here is that the
various systems, e.g. cognitive and physiological,
appear to interact with each other in such a way as
to augment or diminish g.eneral emotional responsivity.
RELATIONSHIP AMONG MEASURES OF
EMOTION
The earlier naive assumption was that measures, e.g.
of anxiety, would all relate to ~me another. It has
become apparent, however, that this is far from true.
As we have seen, the overall pattern of emotion
contains many components: overt elements of
behaviour, internal physiological changes, complex
cognitions ahd perceptions; it leads the individual to
act upon and to interact with his environment in ways
which he interprets as 'coping' or 'failing', etc.
One group of studies has been concerned with the
cognitive activity which underlies the production and
reduction of the stress reaction (Lazarus and Opton,
1966; Lazarus, 1968). This work has monitored
physiological reactions and self-reports to frightening
and threatening films involving death, mutilation,
ostracism, etc. and has examined the effect of
different types of instructions read concurrently with
the showing of films. One set of instructions denied
the harmful features of the events portrayed on the
film. A second set encouraged detached, intellectualised modes of thought. A third emphasised the horror
of the film. The key findings were that both denial
and intellectualisation significantly reduced the stress
reaction as measured via autonomic levels of arousal;
and the results were interpreted as supporting the
proposition that threat depends on the manner in
which a situation is appraised or evaluated. 'Objectively' distressing stimulus events can be viewed
without great stress reaction if these events are
interpreted in non-threatening ways. These findings
are illustrated in Figure 3.6 which shows how both
denial and intellectualising instructions reduce skinconductance (sweating) levels from those found in the
Baseline
22 averaged for
'" o
.c;
20
E 18 2
u
E
.S
'" u
c:
..
tl
:l
" c:
o
u
16
14
12
10
o
o
the three
conditions
10
320 FirSl accident _ sec
: ....... .. .. '
20 30 40
Emotions 39
control condition, when subjects are shown a film
containing distressing accidents.
Lazarus' results also confirm previous findings in
that the different measures yield different pictures of
the emotional state of the individual. He discusses the
reasons why divergence could well occur among
major components without necessarily invalidating
the inferences about a given emotion, suggesting that
each response system has its own adaptive functions,
i.e. it illustrates some special transaction between a
person and his environment. 'Thus what the person
reports to the observer and, to an extent, his
instrumental actions, reflect intentions concerning the
social being with whom he is interacting. At the same
time, the physiological state should also reflect the
direct action tendencies which are mobilised for
dealing in some fashion with the appraised threat.'
Such a view relates to the extensive learning processes
which inhibit, augment, and in many ways 'shape'
individual behaviour. (Chapter 4 reviews some of
these forms oflearning.)
Another set of studies in this area has been
carried out by Schachter (1966) on the cognitive
50 60
Time in 1 O·second intervals
Figure 3.6 Group average skin conductance for three orientation treatments during a fi lm showing distre,sing accident>
(From Lazaru el 0/., 1965, by courtesy of J. Personalily)
40 Basic processes
determinants of emotional states. Schachter accepts
the evidence that a general pattern of sympathetic
discharge is characteristic of emotional states. Given
such a state of arousal, he suggests that one labels,
interprets and identifies this stirred-up state in terms
of the characteristics of the surrounding situation. lIt
is the cognition which determines whether the state of
physiological arousal will be labelled "anger", "joy" or
whatever.' An experimental test of these propositions
was carried out in which an injection of epinephrine
was given to four groups: (I) informed about the
nature of the injection and that they would probably
feel physiological effects, (2) left totally ignorant
about the injection except that it was harmless, (3)
misinformed, and (4) a placebo group. To manipulate
the emotional states of the subjects an actor was
employed, trained to 'act euphorically' and to 'act
angrily'. Results showed that in both euphoric and
anger conditions, emotional level in Group I (epinephrine informed) was ~onsiderably less than the
other two epinephrine groups, supporting the view
that following the injection those subjects who had no
explanation of their bodily state were readily manipulable.into the disparate feeling states of euphoria and
anger. Those subjects injected with epinephrine and
told what they would feel and why proved relatively
immune to the effects of the manipulated cognitions.
In addition to these experimental studies, some
+ 0·6
+ 0·4
Increase
0·2
o
- 0·2
Change in - 0·4
emotional ity
following - 0·6
spi.nal cord _ O.S
lesIon
- 1·0
- 1·2
- 1·4
Decrease
- 1·6
- 1'S
- 20
--- Fear
----- Anger
51 · 3 L1 -5 T7 -12 T1 -4 C2 ·7
Level of Lesion
Figure 3.7 Changes in emotionality as related to height
of spinal cord lesion. (Data from Hohmann, 1962, quoted
by and reproduced from Schachter, 1966, by courtesy of
Academic Press)
interesting reports have been made on the emotional
life of paraplegics and quadriplegics. Hohmann
(1966) conducted a structured interview with these
patients about sexual excitement, anger, fear, grief
and sentimentality; he noted that subjects with cervical lesions described themselves as acting emotional
but not feeling emotional (Figure 3.7). A few typical
quotes might be:
' ... it's sort of cold anger. Sometimes I act angry
when I see some injustice. I yell and cuss and raise
hell, because if you don't do it sometimes, I've learned
people will take advantage of you, but it just doesn't
have the head to it that it used to. It's a mental kind
of anger.'
'Seems like I get thinking mad, not shaking mad,
and that's a lot different.'
These quotations are interestingly contrasted with
those from subjects given injections of adrenaline
(Maraiion, cited by Schachter, 1966) and in whom
physiological arousal is high. These people are conscious of a stirred up state but with no objective
reason for emotionality they describe themselves 'as if
frightened' but yet calm. Schachter (1966) describes
these two sets of introspections as like opposita sides
of the same coin. 'Maraiion's subjects reported the
visceral correlates of emotion, but in the absence of
veridical cognitions did not describe themselves as
feeling emotion. Hohmann's subjects described the
appropriate reaction to an emotion-inducing situation
but in the absence of visceral arousal did not seem to
describe themselves as emotional. It is as if they were
labelling a situation, not describing a feeling.
Obviously, this contrasting set of introspections is
precisely what should be anticipated from a
formulation of emotion as a joint function of cognitive and physiological factors.'
THEORIES OF EMOTION
Up to this point we have been concerned with the
concept of emotion, i.e. with the components of the
emotional state and with the relationship among the
components. Forms of measurement have been
considered and a rough definition of emotion has been
outlined in terms of the patterning of its parts in
specific contexts.
However, we have concentrated on a relatively
objective, testable and experimental approach to
emotion. According to this view meaningful definitions of emotion, whether behavioural, physiological
or clinical, must fulfil at least the requirements of
verifiability and significance. 'The criterion of verifiability could be satisfied by defining the concept so
that the laboratory manipulations could be repeated
by any qualified investigator. The definition must
then specify the relevant environmental, organismic
and response variables. This first criterion is the
procedure for defining scientific concepts "operationally" .. .'. The significance of a concept can be
measured in terms of the extent to which it leads to
the formulation of laws about the phenomena
(Goldstein, 1968).
In considering theories of emotion it is evident that
many lie outside the empirical approach which has
been adopted in this chapter, which requires \in
agreed conceptual system and broad acceptance of
experimental operations. Some theories, on the other
hand, explicitly reject the experimental method, or
phrase their hypotheses in ways which are not
testable. Nevertheless they are of interest in that they
are frequently ingenious and interesting, often exert
considerable influence on our thinking and may
possibly be rephrased in the future so that more
direct tests of their hypotheses become possible.
Theories of emotion are enormously varied in
content and scope and cover widely different aspects
of emotion. It is probably true to say that no single
comprehensive theory exists. Some are concerned
with consciousness and the unconscious, some with
the role of instinctual energies; some with the
problem of how a single, primitive form of excitement
becomes differentiated into specific emotions, others
with the ~pecification of innate emotions which
appear ready made, as it were, to serve our purposes.
The origin of emotional development in the young
infant, in fact the whole genesis of emotional states, is
a problem awaiting analysis. Some theories emphasise
the essential subject-object interaction in emotion,
i.e. the communicative aspects; others deal with those
central nervous system structures which govern the
physiological and behavioural concomitants of
emotion. Obviously they are dealing with very
different facets ofthe whole problem.
One of the earliest theories of emotion to appear
was that of James (1890). This attempted to explain
how emotional behaviour and emotional experience
were interrelated. It stated that the physiological
response comes first, following stimulation by an
exciting event, and that the emotional experience i~
the result of that response. The essence of this view is
the idea that the experience of emotion is based on
the perception of sensations from the viscera. It
seemed to be capable of experimental verification, in
terms of investigating the role of visceral sensations in
emotion. What would happen, for instance, if visceral
connections were severed? Would we still experience
emotion?
Reference has been made to the reports of
Hohmann (1966) on patients suffering spinal cord
lesions. In practice it is of course impossible to induce
lesions in human subjects and much of the experimentation which purported to test James' theory was
carried out on cats and dogs. The results of this work
showed that total separation of the viscera from the
central nervous system does not impair emotional
behaviour but no conclusion could be reached
concerning emotional experience. This can only be
Emotions 41
checked by asking the individual what he is feeling,
hence only human studies are appropriate. Unfortunately, several theorists have failed to recognise that
animal experimentation cannot be employed to test
some of the major theories of emotion as they were
originally formulated. Theories that consider
emotional experience in their major postulates cannot
be tested by animal experimentation.
As mentioned above, this means that different
theories of emotion cover different aspects of the total
phenomena. Theories of emotional behaviour are
often based on instinct theories and the more sophisticated developments proposed by ethologists. Another
approach to the study of emotional behaviour has
been in terms of the neural structures and pathways
which govern and organise physiological/behavioural
reaction patterns. This is illustrated in the classic
work of Hess (1954) who worked with electrodes
implanted in diencephalic structures and observed
autonomic and behavioural reactions to point by
point stimulation of the diencephalon. Tli.e general
field of physiological theories of emotion has been
well-reviewed by Grossman (1967),
Quite a different set of theories emphasise the
subjective, personal quality of human experience of
emotion. This is especially the case in phenomenological and existential theories. Some existentialists,
such as Sartre (1948) explicitly reject the experimental
method; 'essences and facts are incommensurables
and one who begins his inquiry with facts will never
arrive at essences'. The analysis of conscious experience is not necessarily incompatible with an approach
which would structure and assess the dimensions of
such experience, but it must be admitted that there is
no apparent solution to the measurement problems
involved.
While such writers have emphasised the interrogation of consciousness, others hav.: postulated
emotions as psychic forces or tendencies independent
of consciousness, so that the search for the essence of
emotion leads to the unconscious or to unconscious
psychic forces. Freud discussed the existence of
unconscious emotions dating from early infantile
experience, and for Jung an emotion is the intrusion
of an unconscious personality. This group of theories
frequently relates emotion to drives and instinct, to
energy, conflicts and repression, and to a psyche
structurally divided, e.g. ego, id and super-ego.
Emotion is regarded as a phenomenon which bears
witness to an unconscious zone of experience, and
therapies of inadequate emotions therefore involve
practices which investigate the unconscious and allow
it to 'have its say'.
Certain schools derIved from psychoanalytic thinking emphasise the role of emotion as energy which
may be converted, for example into bodily symptoms.
I\.ccording to this view the job of psychosomatic
therapy is to 'reverse' the flow of vital energy into
42 8 asic processes
appropriate channels of out1et before it causes
permanent structural damage in those organs affected
by the misdirected flow. A corollary to the theory of
emotion as energy, and which does not involve transformation or conversion, is the idea that energy must
be discharged or released. Therapeutic techniques of
abreaction, catharsis, and release of organ-energy are
relevant to the view that emotion is energy that must
be 'let out', and they are applied to effect 'relief and
harmony' within the individual.
Theories on the genesis of emotion are equally
varied in their explanations. The view that innate
emotions exist has already been mentioned, but there
are also a number of viewpoints which postulate a
primitive affectivity or excitement out of which the
specific emotions develop. This 'genetic' theory of
emotions states that the undifferentiated excitement
present at birth becomes differentiated and associated
with certain situations and motor responses to form
the separate emotions of later life. The nature of the
original feeling source has been much discussed.
In existential ontology it is Angst, and Freud, too
considered Angst a fundamental emotion. Others
have suggested a primary root of emotional experience in pleasure/unpleasure, sympathy, and a single
fund of 'love-energy'. Therapy in this context can be
seen as a process of development towards the
differentiation of the emotions and away from their
single, simple root or essence (Hillman, 1960).
The problem posed by these theories is that of
explaining the qualitative variety of the emotions, their
number and complexity, by referring to a single,
simple source.
The differentiation of emotions is related to the
development of language and its role in labelling the
various kinds of personal experience. Relatively little
is known about how the child acquires and applies
verbal labels, and how such labels and more complex
statements about emotional states are used by the
adult to describe and explain his own feelings and
behaviour.
Theories of emotion are necessarily linked with
other areas of study in psychology-with motivation,
memory, psychopathology, personality and learning-but relationships among these areas are often
obscure and await clarification. The terms emotion
and motivation, for example, may be treated as
virtually synonymous by some writers, yet are differentiated by others. Such different viewpoints arise
more from the separate traditions and research
interests within psychology than from logical analysis.
Traditionally, the phenomena classified as motivational include activities such as eating, drinking,
escaping from pain, attacking, exploring, care of the
young and the like. It is these and similar activities
that are labelled 'drive behaviours' and that have
traditionally been interpreted in terms of 'instincts',
'drives' or some other primary motive. They are
obviously more conveniently studied in animals like
fish, birds and rats.
The concept of emotion has also been linked with
drives and instincts but in a less satisfactory way, at
least in human subjects. While fear, anger, loveattachment, etc. may be inferred from the behaviour
of animals, they are directly experienced by human
subjects and the perception and evaluation of this
experience plays a prominent role in theories of
human emotion, personality and psychopathology.
Concern with subjective experience represents a
different kind of emphasis from that placed on drive
behaviour, but it does not necessarily imply an
incompatibility of ideas. To attempt to explain
behaviour from insect to man necessarily involves a
variety of motivational processes, ranging from purely
biogenic hypotheses, in which behaviour unfolds from
a series of innate drives and instincts, to highly
sociogenic theories which emphasise the flexibility of
behaviour into patterns determined by cultural forces.
Few of the available theories deal adequately with
human subjective experience, either cognitive or
emotional.
Motivation and drive
The concept of drive is central to most theories of
motivation, and during the past few decades it has
been extensively and ingeniously linked with theories
of learning. These have mainly dealt with animal
laboratory experiments but they have also been
extended to human behaviour and human emotions.
One of the advantages of the 'drive' concept over
earlier instinct concepts was its precise definition in
terms of factors like hours of deprivation (of food or
water), the intensity of an unpleasant stimulus, or the
level of organismic arousal as indexed by measures of
autonomic or cortical activity. Deprivation, for
example, was conceived as resulting in deficits (as in
hunger) which provided stimuli that goaded the
organism into activity. Thus deprived animals became
restless and active; crossed obstructions to obtain
incentives; learned a variety of appropriate responses
which resulted in varieties of consummated behaviour.
This conception of drive as 'energy' impelling an
organism to action has parallels in several analyses of
human emotion. Classical psychoanalysis also
developed a model in which drive energy was seen to
accumulate and to require discharge, again with the
implication of an inexorable accumulation of energy
which stirs the organism into regulatory activity.
Deprivation in Freud's model arises from the failure
to discharge the accumulated tension rather than
from the depletion of tissues (as in hunger); it was
believed that widely varied behaviours had their
ultimate motivational origin in libido, aggressive
drives, and anxiety.
The model implied in these various views is that
behaviour is an attempt to preserve organismic
integrity by 'homeostatic' restorations of equilibrium.
Some form of equilibrium concept occurs in instinct
and drive theories, theories of emotion, analyses of
conflict and stress and even in socially derived motivation (see Cofer and Appley, 1964). The term
homeostasis was originally coined by a physiologist
(Cannon, 1932) to describe the steady states attained
at any particular moment by the physiological processes at work in living organisms. Since then the
term has been applied to many psychological
conditions. The homeostatic position in general is that
the organism (and each of its subsystems) tends to
resist changes in its environment that are of a
magnitude large enough to upset its equilibrium or
threaten its survival as a stable system. The theory
does not require that a disturbed system return to its
prior state of equilibrium; by assuming that biological
systems are open and have continuous energy
exchange with the environment it allows for a variety
of means and states through which stability can be
reached.
The learning theorist Clark Hull (1943) assumed
that all behaviour is motivated by homeostatic drives
or secondary drives based upon them. He also
assumed that all rewards are ultimately based on the
reduction of a primary homeostatic drive. A reward
of food reduces the homeostatic imbalance produced
by hunger: and all animals will rapidly learn quite
difficult responses to get a reward. Secondary
rewards, such as social approval, are effective because
they have been associated with food and other
primary rewards in the past. In this sense drive is
conceived as arising from a tissue need and having
the general function of arousing or activating behaviour. Direct tension reduction becomes the critical
reinforcement factor in the process oflearning.
The essence of the drive doctrine can perhaps be
summarised (and oversimplified) in the form of two
propositions:
(i) Organisms act only to reduce their drives; thus
all activities are interpreted as direct or indirect
attempts at drive reduction.
(ii) Activities that are accompanied by a reduction in
drive are strengthened, and such drive reduction is
a necessary condition for learning to occur.
Drive theory, in one form or another, still stands at
the centre of modern thinking about motivation and
learning, and has been extended to the analysis of
emotional states such as fear and anxiety, aggression
and dependency. These emotional states are considered within the theory as logically equivalent in
status, character and function to such drives as
hunger and thirst. Attempts have been made, for
example, to treat frustration as a drive which has
particular patterns of behaviour associated with it,
typically anger and attacking behaviour. Aggression
may be directed toward the frustrating agent or
turned against some other object or person, including
Emotions 43
the self. Although the early suggestion was that
aggression always results from frustration and that
frustration always leads to aggression, the second half
of this hypothesis has been modified to acknowledge
that a number of other reactions to frustration, in
addition to aggression, are possible. Included among
these alternatives are regression, repression, and
fixation (Maier, 1949).
Conflict can be regarded as a special case of
frustration, often arising from two or more equal but
incompatible response tendencies. In a sense it is
equivalent to a condition of double frustration, each
of the competing tendencies serving as the barrier to
the completion of the other. As in the case of other
frustrations, conflict is a state of increased tension,
but by its very nature it is characterised by vacillation, hesitancy, fatigue and often complete blocking
(Miller, 1944). In both clinical observations and
experimental studies conflict has been shown to be an
emotional response to a situation requiring incompatible responses, e.g. those involving approach to
and those involving avoidance of a goal.
Perhaps the most widely discussed emotion il). the
context of learning and emotion is fear or anxiety.
One influential view is that anxiety is a learned
response occurring to signals that are premonitory of
situations of injury or pain (Mowrer, 1939). According to this view, anxiety is basically anticipatory in
nature and has great biological utility in that it
adaptively motivates living organisms to deal with
traumatic events in advance of their actual occurrence, thereby diminishing harmful effects.
It is in this general biological sense that both
'emotion' and 'motivation' can be viewed as a
complex integration of behaviour involving selective
attention to certain events, a heightened physiological
state of excitement, and certain probable patterns of
action. These patterns of action are common to most
higher species of animals and have a clear biological
utility in coping with environment and survival. Both
are linked to environmental stimuli which act as
incentives or triggers of behaviour, and to internal
organismic conditions. Neither the external incentive
nor the physiological state is in itself sufficient for
producing any species-typical action: an interplay
between them is necessary. This interplay can be
illustrated in accounts of sexual arousal which
emphasise that sexual behaviour depends on two
conditions: adequate hormonal levels and adequate
external stimulation.
Over the years it has become increasingly clear that
our existing theories of motivation and learning, while
retaining a certain heuristic value, are thinly stretched
when it comes to human experience. Various social
needs relating to achievement, power, affiliation, etc.
have been postulated which do not readily fit into
existing drive theories, and in the development of
which early emotional experiences seem. to be par-
44 Basic processes
ticularly relevant. There is, nonetheless, a very
substantial and impressive set of studies attempting
to analyse the many aspects of motivation, emotion
and learning which have been outlined. The present
chapter has considered some of this evidence in
relation to the complex experience and reaction
pattern which we label 'emotional'. This pattern is not
fixed but alters as it encounters the stresses and
demands of the environment, and as we learn to
interact with the environment more or less successfully. Whatever innate emotional mechanisms there
may be, they are modified and shaped by the
individual's transactions with the outer world. It is the
nature of these learning mechanisms which must now
References
Argyle, M. (1969). Social Interaction (London: Methuen)
Arnold, Magda B. (1960). Emotion and Personality (2 vols.)
(New York: Columbia University Press)
Cannon, W. B. (1929). Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger,
Fear and Rage, 2nd Ed. (New York: Harper and Row)
Cannon. W. B. (1932). The Wisdom of the Body (New
York: W. W. Norton)
Cofer, C. N. and Appley, M. H. (1964). Motivation: Theory
and Research (New York: Wiley)
Davitz, 1. R. (1964). The Communication of Emotional
Meaning (New York: McGraw-Hill)
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. (1971). Love and Hate (London: Methuen)
Ekman, P., Friesen, Wallace, V. and Ellsworth, Phoebe
(1972). Emotion in the Human Face (New York:
Pergamon Press)
Epstein, S. (1967). Toward a unified theory of anxiety. In:
Progress in Experimental Personality Research, Vol. 4
(B. A. Maher, editor) (New York: Academic Press)
Exline, R. (1971). Visual Interaction: The glances of Power
and Preference. In: Nebraska Symposium on Motivation
(1. K. Cole, editor) (Lincoln, Nebraska: University of
Nebraska Press)
Eysenck, H. 1. (1967). The Biological Basis of Personality
(Springfield: Thomas)
Eysenck, H. 1. (1969). The Structure of Human Personality,
3rd Ed. (London: Methuen)
Goldstein, M. L. (1968). Physiological theories of emotion:
a critical historical review from the standpoint of
behaviour theory. Psycho!. Bull., 69, 23--40
Grossman, S. P. (1967). A Textbook of Physiological
Psychology (New York: Wiley)
Hebb, D. O. (1946). On the nature of fear. Psycho!. Rev.,
53,259-276
Hebb, D. O. (1955). Drives and the CNS (conceptual
nervous system). Psychol. Rev., 62, 243-254
Hes>, W. R. (1954). The diencephalon: Autonomic and
Extra-Pyramidal Functions (London: Heinemann)
Hillman, 1. (1960). Emotion. A Comprehensive Phenomenology of Theories and their Meanings for Therapy
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul)
Hohmann, G. W. (1966). Some effects of spinal cord lesions
on experienced emotional feelings. Psychophysiology, 3,
143-156
Hull, C. L. (1943). Princip{es of Behaviour (New York:
Appleton-Century Crofts)
be examined.
Animal laboratory studies of conditioning and
learning have been of importance in psychology since
the beginning of the century. It is only in the last
decade or two that there has been a growth of interest
in the application of conditioning principles to
human problems and human retraining. The combination of laboratory-based experiments and
applied clinical therapies provides a rich, diverse
array of evidence which is contributing to a reshaping of the older style theories of learning. The
next chapter will first discuss some of the basic
paradigms of learning and then consider their role in
the analysis of human emotional behaviour.
lames, W. (1890). Principles of Psychology (London:
Macmillan)
Kendell, R: E. (1968). The Classification of Depressive
Illnesses (London: Oxford University Press)
Lang, P. 1. (1968). Fear reduction and fear behavior:
Problems in treating a construct. In: Research in Psychotherapy, Vol. 3 (1. M. Shlien, editor) (Washington:
American Psychological Association)
Lazarus, R. S., Opton, E. M., Jr., Nomikos, M. S. and
Rankin, N. O. (1965). The principle of short-circuiting of
threat: Further evidence. J. Personal., 33, 622-635
Lazarus, R. S. (1966). Psychological Stress and the Coping
Process (New York: McGraw-Hill)
Lazarus, R. S. and Opton, E. M. Jr. (1966). The study of
psychological stress: A summary of theoretical formulations and experimental findings. In: Anxiety and
Behavior, Chap. 10 (C. D. Spielberger, editor) (New
York: Academic Press)
Lazarus, R. S. (1968). Emotions and adaptation: conceptual
and empirical relations. In: Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation, 175-266 (W. 1. Arnold, editor) (Lincoln,
Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press)
Lewis, M. and Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne (1972). Self, other and
fear: the reaction of infants to people. Princeton, N. S. :
Education Testing Service. Res. Bull., May
Lewis, M. and Freedle, R. (1972). Mother-infant dyad: the
cradle of meaning. Paper presented at a symposium on
'Language and Thought: Communication and Affect'
(Erindale College, University of Toronto)
Lorenz, K. (1967). On aggression (London: Methuen)
Maier, N. R. F. (1949). Frustration: The study of behaviour
without a goal (New York: McGraw-Hill)
Martin, Irene (1973). Somatic Reactivity: Interpretation.
Handbook of Abnormal Psychology, 2nd Ed., Chap. II
(H. J. Eysenck, editor) (London: Pitman)
Mathews, A. (1971). Psychophysiological approaches to the
investigation' of desensitization and related procedures.
Psychol. Bull, 76, 73-91
McDougall, W. (1912). An Introduction to Social Psychology (Boston: Luce)
Meichenbaum, D. (1972). Clinical implications of modifying
what clients say to themselves. University of Waterloo,
Research Reports in Psychology: Waterloo, Ontario:
Research Report, No. 42
Miller, N. E. (1944). Experimental studies in conflict. In:
Personality and the Behaviour Disorders (J. Hunt, editor)
(New York: Ronald Press)
Mowrer, O. H. (1939). A stimulus-response analysis of
anxiety and its role as a reinforcing agent. Psychol. Rev.,
46,553-565
Sartre, J. P. (1948). The Emotio.ns: Outline of a Theory
(New York: Philosophical Library)
Schachter, S. (1966). The interaction of cognitive and
physiological determinants of emotional state. In:
Anxiety and Behavior, Chap. 9 (C. D. Spielberger, editor)
(New York: Academic Press)
Schildkraut, J. J. and Kety, S. S. (1967). Biogenic amines
and emotion. Science, 156,21-30
Seligman, M. E. P., Maier, S. F. and Solomon, R. L. (1971).
Emotions 45
Unpredictable and uncontrollable aversive events. In:
Aversive Conditioning and Learning, Chap. 6 (F. R.
Brush, editor) (New York: Academic Press)
Selye, H. (1956). The stress of life (New York: McGrawHill)
Tinbergen, N. (1953). The Herring Gulfs World (London:
Collins)
van Lawick-Goodall, Jane (1971). In the Shadow qJ Man
(London: Collins)
Williams, R. J. (1956). Biochemical Individuality (New
York: Wiley)
Zegans, Susan and Zegans, L. S. (1972). Fear of strangers
in children and the orienting reaction. Behavioral Sci., 17,
407--419
Chapter 4
CONDITIONING
Irene D. Martin
There is firm and substantial evidence for the view
that conditioning processes play an important role in
toe acquisition of human emotional responses, attitudes and values, social skills, conscience, and even
some aspects of language. This is not always apparent
from the traditional, zoo centric approach of learning
theorists. It is now almost a hundred years since basic
conditioning paradigms began to be explored, largely
with infra-human animals and almost entirely under
strictly-controlled laboratory conditions. An outline of
these basic conditioning paradigms and principles will
be given in this chapter; they represent the fundamental groundwork of conditioning theory and practice.
More recently, however, there has been an expansion in human-oriented studies, both laboratory and
clinical, and this has forced investigators to broaden
their view of conditioning and to adopt a more flexible
approach to some of the basic assumptions of traditional studies. Older assumptions have had to make
way for a loosening of definitions: a conditioned
response is not necessarily a reflex, a stimulus not
necessarily defined in physical terms but in terms of
salience and significance for the individual. Perceptual/
cognitive factors may alter the typical learning curve,
and their effects have to be taken into account.
Learning is a process occurring continuously in the
transactions which living organisms have with their
surroundings. The varieties of learning in a lifetime's
experience are many: we have learned to use our
hands; we have learned languages; we have learned a
whole range of social skills and attitudes.
It is debatable how many basic types of learning
there are, and whether one or more theories is required to account for them. Categories of human
learning include conditioning, probability learning,
motor skill learning, and problem solving, among
others. While certain theoretical issues remain obscure
there is fairly general agreement about some of the
principles of learning, i.e. on those factors which
determine whether or not learning is likely to occur,
how efficient and rapid the learned response will be,
and how well it will be retained. High on the list of
relevant principles is the role of motivation. The
motivational state of the organism, whether in a more
primitive 'drive' sense (hunger, thirst, sex, etc.) or in a
more general arousal sense (level of general emotionality or autonomic activation) is known to affect the
rate and kind of learning. Another important and
related factor is that of reward and punishment. This
can be used very effectively to control behaviour, and
learning is more easily accomplished when explicit
programmes are adopted. Thus the 'schedules of
reinforcement' frequently described in the literature
relate to the way in which the organism's specific
responses are linked with specific rewards and punishment in a highly controlled way.
Conditioning is one of the categories of learning
which has been studied in all kinds of species of
animals. The process of conditioning refers to a
change in responsiveness; first, to the occurrence of
new responses, and second to a change in the response
over time, often to some criterion such as increased
efficiency or economy of effort. Typically the conditioning experiment involves the successive occurrence
in time of two stimuli: the first a mild stimulus
producing little or no reaction, and the second a
significant or salient stimulus which produces a clearcut reaction.
Typical examples of experimental sequences of
pairs of stimuli are: a buzzer followed by an electric
shock; a tone followed by food; a dim light followed
by an airpuff into the eye. These sequences are illustrated in Figure 4.1 which also shows the kinds of
reactions which are measured in laboratory conditioning experiments.
TERMINOLOGY
Pavlov called the presentation of food the unconditioned stimulus (UCS) and the salivation which it
evoked the unconditioned response (UCR). The
repeated pairing of the buzzer with the food turns the
originally neutral stimulus into a conditioned stimulus
(CS) which now evokes salivation as a conditioned
response (CR). Thus conditioning experiments are
essentially concerned with a simple temporal-relational property between two stimuli: A followed by B.
Note that B must be the more intense or significant
stimulus if conditioning is to occur. If this situation is
reversed and the more intense stimulus B precedes A,
we have a situation of 'backward conditi0l1ing' which
has different and less profound effects than the usual
forward conditioning situation. Note also that several
important requirements