REHABILITATION OF CRIMINALS
AS AN ETHICAL ISSUE
A more complicated issue arises when we come to
criminals. Here behaviour therapists have suggested
new methods of treatment which hold out a promise
Psychology as a biD-social science 1 1
of rehabilitation better than any of the existing
methods-token economies, conditioning methods,
modelling, and many others. (Needless to say, none
of these resemble .in any way, shape or form the
methods used in such films as 'A Clockwork Orange'.
Not only are these inhuman to such an extent that
they would never be used by any clinical psychologist,
but also they are extremely unlikely to work. Discussion of modern methods of treatment is often
made impossibly difficult because most people derive
their views from films such as this rather than from
reading the official documents.) Now it is sometimes
suggested that crime is the product of the social
system, and that rehabilitation of criminals simply
serves to support the system and make criminals
'conform' to the rules of that system. Accordingly, it
is suggested that such methods of rehabilitation are
not acceptable. It is undoubtedly true that to some
extent the definition of crime is a social matter;
homosexuality is a crime in some countries, but not in
others. Adultery is a crime in some American states,
but not in England. However, murder and theft are
crimes practically everywhere, including both capitalist and communist countries; no society can exist
without explicit rules of conduct, the breaking of
which is punished in some way or other. Furthermore,
the purpose of such punishment is in part the rehabilitation of the culprit; deterrence and retaliation
are the other two purposes, but they are probably less
important in the long run. No known tribe, country,
or civilisation has ever been able to do without
punishment of antisocial conduct; it would seem
reasonable to prefer humane methods (such as those
advocated by behaviour therapists) to inhumane ones
(such as are all too frequently found in many
countries).
Furthermore, overemphasis on the social side of
antisocial behaviour does not take into account the
biological. It is well-documented that criminality has a
strong hereditary component; identical twins are far
more often concordant for criminality than are
fraternal twins, a fact which strongly implicates
genetic factors. Furthermore, when babies are taken
from criminal and non-criminal parents and adopted
by criminal and non-criminal foster parents, it is
found that- the adolescent and grown-up foster
children take after their biological parents, not their
foster parents-in spite of the fact that it is the latter
who have provided them with their environment for
practically their whole lives. In other words, antisocial behaviour is partly an innate characteristic of
people, a characteristic which would emerge in any
society. Here as always it is necessary to bear in mind
that man is both a &ocial and a biological animal; no
answer to our problems is likely to be found useful
and practicable which does not take into account one
or the otht:r of these two complementary factors.
Last but not least, objections to behavioural treat-
12 Basic processes
ment of criminality do not take into account the
wishes of the criminals themselves. Contrary to a
priori thinking, criminals very often do not see themselves as opponents of the 'system' which society has
imposed on them; quite the contrary is true. They
often see themselves as strong defenders of the
system, and may be more conservative than other,
comparable groups of the population (Siddiqi et ai.,
1973). Their reactions to homosexuals, baby bashers
and sex criminals are often such that these offenders
have to be protected against the wrath of the 'normal'
criminals. Furthermore, criminals (particularly young
criminals) very often express a strong desire for
rehabilitation, and volunteer readily to take part in
experiments carried out in prisons, borstals, and other
institutions. The ethics of submitting unwilling
prisoners to behavioural treatment are doubtful, to
say the least; in any case, the methods are unlikely
to work with any but true volunteers. But to refuse
these volunteers a chance to become happy and
contented citizens on political and other grounds
which are not shared by the prisoners in question
themselves seems equally unethical; to do so would
impose on other people one's own ideals and views.
Much more could be said about these ethical
problems which beset all our efforts to use modern
methods of psychology for the betterment of mankind; clearly these problems are very real, and equally
clearly it is very difficult to know what the true
answers might be--even given that there are any true
answers. We are perhaps not likely to go too far
wrong if we adopt as our motivation the benefit of the
individual sufferer; compassion may mislead us
sometimes, but it is unlikely to lead us too far in the
direction of dangerous inhumanity.
In short, behaviourist psychology is in exactly the
same position as all science, as far as application is
concerned; whether it is well or ill applied, to the
benefit or the detriment of mankind, depends on
mankind itself, not on the scientists in question. When
Rutherford split the atom, he was convinced that this
discovery would never be of any practical use. Since
then, we have seen this discovery applied to the
making of atom bombs, casting their menacing
shadows over mankind as a whole; we have also seen
it applied to the creation of energy urgently needed by
mankind to replace the rapidly ebbing reserves of
natural fuels. Without Rutherford's discovery we
might be marginally safer from destruction by war;
we would also be certain to run out of electricity and
other forms of energy by the turn of the century, or
even earlier. This would condemn hundreds of
millions of people to death, and the rest of mankind
to a much more hazardous and less comfortable life
than they enjoy at the moment. It is as wrong to look
only at the dark side of scientific inventiveness as it is
to look only at the bright side; we have to learn to
look fearlessly at both sides, and then come to
realistic conclusions about the balance in terms of the
quality of human life.
SHOULD PSYCHOLOGY BE SCIENTIFIC?
In this introductory chapter, we have spoken of
behaviouristic psychology as if it were the only kind
of psychology in existence. In so far as we are talking
about psychology as a scientific discipline, this is
clearly true. Methodological behaviourism, unlike
philosophical behaviourism, really means little else
but a commitment to the application of scientific
method to psychological problems; it does not lay
down precise rules and laws as to just how this should
be done. It thus lacks content; to say that one disagrees with behaviourism is almost meaningless,
unless of course what is meant is philosophical
behaviourism which we have already agreed is irrelevant to the development of psychology as a science.
The only conceivable meaning that dislike of methodological behaviourism may have is a dislike of the
application of science to human problems; such a
dislike is certainly quite widespread, and has given
rise to a kind of literary, philosophical psychology
which is professed by existentialists, writers, and
philosophers who have usually not received any
training in academic psychology. At first sight, some
of the criticisms made by these people sound sensible
and attractive; when one looks closer, however, they
are found to be based on erroneous notions of what
science means, and what it aims at.
Thus critics will say that behaviouristic models of
human conduct are grossly oversimplified, that they
leave out essential features of human conduct, and
that they reduce man, the glory of creation, to a
mechanical ape. Another criticism which is often
voiced is that psychologists do not deal with precisely
those aspects of behaviour, like love, or creativity, or
altruism, which are specifically human, and which
are of much more interest to readers than those
topics featured in most textbooks-visual acuity, rote
learning, or the formation of conditioned reflexes. To
some degree these criticisms are of course true; most
people would prefer to see a Shakespeare play, read a
Wordsworth sonnet, or listen to a discussion on the
nature of love by a group of writers, actors and
much-married film stars, rather than study the mathematical formulae in Thurstone's book on factor
analysis, read through thousands of scientific papers
dealing with the extinction of conditioned reflexes, or
carry out endless experiments on the physiological
concomitants of emotional arousal. But to state such
an obvious truth is to say nothing about the aims of
scientific psychology; it simply means that most
people prefer being amused to working hard. Scientific
knowledge is additive; literary insight is not. We may
argue that Shakespeare had more insight into human
nature than does the average psychologist; it would be
difficult to dissent. But similarly top tennis players,
or golf stars, or international foot bailers, probably
have more insight into the behaviour of globular,
inflated rubber spheres when struck by hard objects
than does the average physicist. This knowledge,
however, is private; it cannot be transferred to other
people. If we wish to land a rocket filled with people
on the moon, we still turn to physicists, rather than to
sportsmen. Would Shakespeare's insight have led us
to find a proper therapy for head bangers? Poetic
insight is fun, and it may even have cathartic effects
on certain individuals; nevertheless it does not help us
solve practical problems in the psychological field.
Whether psychology does all that much better is a
moot point; we will be better able to discuss this at
the end of this book. But psychology is constantly
growing more and more able to deal with its
problems; the knowledge it possesses is additive.
Writers cannot claim the same for their craft; there
is a notable absence of Shakespeares in the modern
theatre!
Psychology oversimplifies, does not deal with
important problems which concern the man in the
street, and puts forward a model of human behaviour
which is not too complimentary. It does these things,
not because of some wayward strain in the psychologists who do all these things, but simply because it
is a science. Inevitably all science oversimplifies,
most of all when it is still young and relatively
ignorant. Astronomy for centuries treated the earth
as if it were a perfect sphere; this is grossly inaccurate
and 'oversimplified'. The earth is flattened over the
poles, and pear-shaped in addition; these facts were
not of any great importance for the purposes of
astronomers intent on understanding our planetary
system. They are now important when we are trying
to send rockets to the moon, and consequently they
are now being taken into account. It is the task of
science to bring order into the chaos of blooming,
buzzing confusion which constitutes experience; it
does so by isolating invariant bits of experience, and
studying these in depth. It has been incredibly
successful in doing so, but of course there is a price
to pay. If we throw a man and a pig from the tower
of Pisa, they will arrive at the same time on the flat
ground below the tower; this can be used to demonstrate Galileo's law of falling bodies, although it seems
to equate pigs and humans. For the purpose of the
scientist in studying the laws of falling bodies, this
distinction is irrelevant; no insult is intended either to
pigs or humans. Science is based on abstraction, and
abstraction comes only with difficulty to most people.
Nevertheless, if we want to study psychology scientifically, we must use abstraction in the same way,
and to the same extent, as do other sciences. Without
simplification we could not even start; the acid test of
whether we have done our job properly is not whether
the result appeals to the layman, but whether we
arrive at a model which can be used to predict and
Psychology as a bio-social science 13
explain the facts with which we are concerned. Thus
our criterion is a technical one, and success can only
be measured in technical terms; features of our
model which offend the outsider may be essential in
accounting for the facts. A scientific model is not
meant to be a portrait!
Whether psychology deals with problems which are
important to the man in the street or not cannot be
decided by the man in the street; it is not necessarily
apparent to the layman whether fundamental research
is or is not relevant to one of his problems. Skinner's
work on pigeons learning to peck at a coloured disc
may seem quite irrelevant to anything of practical
importance, but it has led to valuable practical
methods of treating psychotic patients, criminals, and
other groups. Rutherford's work on the atom, as
already mentioned, seemed quite irrelevant to any
practical problems, yet it produced some of the most
'relevant' solutions to problems of war and peace that
have ever been produced. It is simply impossible for
the outsider (and often even for the insider) to say
what the practical relevance of a scientific investigation may be in the future; what is certain is that
direct attacks on practical problems have in the past
had a poor rate of success. Fundamental problems
have to be solved before any direct attack may be
possible, and only the expert can assess the value of
such fundamental work. And even the expert can
often be wrong in his assessment!
The model of human conduct put up by modern
psychology is not complimentary for the same reason
that Copernicus's heliocentric model of the planetary
system was judged to be uncomplimentary to mankind, by displacing the earth from the centre of the
Universe, or Darwin's doctrine of evolution an insult
to human values, by failing to make man unique in
creation. We are not only social beings, but biological beings as well; this biological background we
share with rats, jackals and pigeons. Thirst, hunger
and sex are fundamental drives for human beings, just
as they are for other animals; fear, rage and lust are
powerful emotions which govern our conduct as
surely as they govern the conduct of cats, racoons
and dogs. No model would begin to do the job which
did not embody these facts prominently and explicitly.
The model must of course, also contain other
features-some features are clearly difficult to replicate in animal work, and the study of human beings
in all their complexity is required in order to make the
model more lifelike. This is a tremendous task, and if
psychology has not made as much headway as one
might have wished, the reason is partly its youth, and
partly the fact that society has not supported psychology to an extent which would enable it to forge
ahead as fast as it might otherwise have done. But
adequate or not, the present model is the best we
have. In the same way, Newton's model was the best
available 300 years ago; by modern standards it was
, 4 Basic processes
defective in many, many different ways. Yet it did
good service until dethroned by a better one.
Scientists learn to put up with simple models, in the
hope that investigation and criticism of the model will
lead to new facts and theories which will in due course
improve the model out of all recognition, or change it
altogether. By a process of conjectures and refutations (Popper, 1963) science pulls itself up by its
bootstraps, constantly improving its models, and the
fit of these models to the facts. It is not sufficient for
the critic to say that he doesn't like what he sees;
References
Boring, E. G. (1950). A History of Experimental Psychology (New York: Appleton, Century, Crofts)
Eysenck, H. J. (1974). The Natural History of Neurosis. In:
Stress and Anxiety, Vol. I, D. Spielberger and 1. G.
Sara son (editors) (London: Wiley)
Gray, J. A. (1971). The Psychology of Fear and Stress
(London: Weidenfeld, Nicolson)
Masserman, J. M. (1943). Behavior and Neurosis (Chicago:
Univ. of Chicago Press)
this is not constructive criticism. The task of the
critic in science is to propose a better theory,
buttress it with new facts, and apply it in new and
original ways. Psychology must be a science if it is to
transcend popular wisdom, and the insight of the
playwright and novelist; it has made a good beginning,
even though some critics would like to write at the
end of the report: 'Could do better'. As long as
psychologists remember the dual nature of man as a
biological animal and a social organism, psychology
no doubt will do better in the near future.
Pavlov, 1. P. (1927). Conditioned Reflexes (Oxford: University Press)
Popper, K. R. (1963). Conjectures and Refutations (London:
RQutledge Kegan Paul)
Siddiqui, J. A., Haara, A. and Schnabel, W. (1973). Conservati~e policemen, even more conservative prisoners: A
factor-analytical investigation using Wilson and
Patterson's Conservatism Scale. Psychol. Beitr., 15,
106-118
Chapter 2
PERCEPTION
C. D. Frith
INTRODUCTION
Perception is the transformation of the physical world
into 'mental images'. In this brief account ot the
scientific study of perception I shall be less concerned
with the brain mechanisms underlying these mental
images and more concerned with the nature of the
images themselves and how they differ from the
physical world that they represent; for if the transformation is to be useful the mental image must be
'different' from the physical world. If the brain contained a perfect representation of the world then the
problem of how to interpret and use this picture would
still remain. Thus the map is a better analogy of the
mental image than the photograph. The map retains
only a very limited amount of information about the
country it represents. It makes use of conventional
signs, contour lines and imaginary grids. The uselessness of the 'perfect' map is illustrated by the following
anecdote from a collection by Borges and Casares
(1971).
'In that Empire, the Art of Cartography achieved
such Perfection that the Map of one single Province
occupied the whole of a City, and the Map of the
Empire, the whole of a Province. In time, those
Disproportionate Maps failed to satisfy and the
Schools of Cartography sketched a Map of the
Empire which was the size of the Empire and coincided at every point with it. Less Addicted to the
Study of Cartography, the Following Generations
comprehended that this dilated Map was Useless
and, not without Impiety, delivered it to the Inclemencies of the Sun and ofthe Winters. In the Western
Deserts there remain piecemeal Ruins of the Map,
inhabited by Animals and Beggars. In the entire
rest of the Country there is no vestige left of the
Geographical Disciplines.'
Suarez Miranda, Viajes de Varones Prudentes,
libro cuarto, cap. XIV (Lerida, 1658)
To economise on effort and so as not to overload a
limited memory capacity, the organism seeks to
ignore as much of the environment as possible. Much
can simply be discarded because it is of no relevance
to the survival of the organism. Of more interest are
those perceptual processes which ignore aspects of the
environment because they are redundant. One aspect
of the environment is redundant if some other aspect
provides the same information. Thus people with
beards tend to be men and other sexual characteristics
can be ignored. It used also to be the case that people
with long hair tended to be women. When this recently ceased to be so considerable confusion resulted
for a time. To make use of redundancy the organism
has to detect relationships between different aspects of
the environment. It must discover principles of
organisation in the environment or even impose
organisation upon the environment. By emphasising
these aspects of perception I relate it closely to higher
order functions such as abstract thinking, pattern
detection, concept formation and even language.
The processes that I propose are involved in
perception, are precisely the same as those used by a
scientist or a statistician in dealing with the large
masses of data he collects. He too discards irrelevant
data and tries to represent populations by a few
measures such as the mean and the standard deviation. He too seeks for relationships between the
variables he measun:s.
Perceptual proc(:sses then are concerned with
reducing the very large amount of information available in the environment into a small amount used by
the organism. This can be seen as a necessary strategy to overcome th(: organism's very limited memory
capacity. Such a relation between memory capacity
and abstract thinking (the organising process in
perception) has been described by Borges (1964) and
Luria (1969). In both the cases described (one fictional and one fact) a phenomenal memory resulted in
a severe impairment of the capacity for abstract
thought, for if every member of a set can be remembered there is no need to discover a rule for generating the set.
THE RAW SENSES
Sense receptors respond to various forms of energy.
The elements in the retina respond to light waves,
those in the ear to mechanical vibrations and so on.
At this stage a vast amount of possible information is
ignored. We can see neither infrared nor ultraviolet
light and most of us cannot hear the cries of bats.
Information carried by these forms of energy is
apparently irrelevant to our survival. A striking
illustration of the selectivity of the senses is provided
by the touch receptors. In this modality the face and
hands (in humans) are represented in the brain in
enormous detail and in the rest of the body hardly at
all (Figure 2.1). In other animals, different parts of the
16 Basic processes
Figure 2.1 Diagram of section cut through a human
brain showing the representation of body parts as measured
by evoked potentials recorded from each point of the cortex
upon stimulation of the skin at the parts of the body shown.
(Redrawn from W. Penfield and T. Rasmussen, The
Cerebral Cortex of Man. New York: Macmillan, 1952)
body are heavily represented as is appropriate to their
particular life style.
Psychophysics
One of the earliest ways in which psychologists tried
to investigate the mental representation of the physical
environment was by studying the sensations associated with particular physical levels of a stimulus. We
can ask the question, 'how much does the energy level
of a stimulus (the brightness of a light or the loudness of a sound) have to be increased in order to
produce a just noticeable change in sensation?' The
answer to this question seems to be of almost universal application. The relation between physical energy
and sensation is usually a logarithmic one. This is
known as the Weber-Fechner law. If the light intensity
is Iowa small change in intensity is easily noticed. If
the light is very bright then the change has to be large
before it is noticed. The same principle applies, among
other things, to wages and salaries. A farm worker
earning £20 a week will certainly notice an increase of
£2 a week, whereas a company director would certainly not notice such an increase even if he were
successfully avoiding tax. As a result wage and salary
increases are nearly always in terms of percentages,
which is equivalent to using a logarithmic scale.
The transformation performed on stimulus energy
by the nervous system has the effect of concentrating
its processing capabilities on low energy stimuli at the
expense of high energy stimuli.
Thresholds
In talking about the relation between stimulus energy
and sensation I have avoided discussing how sensation is measured. On the whole people are very bad
at describing sensations, but they are very good at
detecting changes in sensation. Thus in the experiments relating stimulus energy to sensation the experimenter would increase stimulus energy until the
observer said that his sensation had changed. The
minimum change in stimulus energy needed to produce a change in sensation is called the difference
threshold. A similar parameter of sensation that has
been measured even more frequently is the absolute
threshold. This is the minimum intensity for a light or
a sound or whatever to be detectable. Many sensations can have absolute thresholds in this sense. Thus
we can measure the fastest rate at which a light can
flicker and still be distinguishable from a steady light.
We can measure the shortest distance apart for two
points to be felt as two rather than one.
Most of these thresholds are sensitive to gross
changes in the state of the organism such as might be
brought about by drugs or brain damage (Milner and
Teuber, 1968).
There is however a methodological problem in
measuring thresholds in this way. An observer is often
uncertain whether he saw the dim flash of light or not.
What will he say in this situation? If he is a radar
operator detecting enemy ICBMs he may not wish to
set off World War III accidentally, and therefore,
when in doubt, he will say he saw nothing. If on the
other hand he is detecting birds in the path of a
civilian airliner he would rather give a false alarm
than perhaps cause the death of many passengers. In
these examples it is clear that the observers would
have very different thresholds. The second observer
would report much dimmer lights than the first. These
differences are not due to differences in sensation, but
result from a difference in the willingness to give the
two responses 'yes' or 'no'. This is called a response
bias. It is clearly sometimes important to distinguish
changes in sensation from changes in response bias
(Tanner & Swets, 1954).
Clark (1969) studied the effects of a placebo, which
his subjects believed to be analgesic, on the pain
threshold. He found that the placebo increased the
pain threshold. However a more detailed analysis
showed that sensitivity to pain had not changed,
merely the subjects' willingness to report pain. With a
real analgesic, on the other hand, the change in
threshold was associated with a change in sensitivity
to pain.
Contour extraction
Phenomena such as thresholds are automatic, i.e.
largely determined by the nature of the peripheral
sense organs. These processes seem to have little to do
with abstract thinking and the other higher order
abilities. mentioned in the introduction. The mechanism
to be described next is also automatic and peripheral.
Nevertheless it performs a sophisticated transformation upon incoming information which has much in
common with the higher order processes.
The world about us, contrary to the view of the
impressionist painters, does not consist of a multitude
of dots of different colours and brightnesses. What we
see tends to occur in large blocks. Objects such as
houses, trees and animals tend to have outlines that
separate them from their backgrounds. This separating outline is particularly noticeable when the object
moves in relation to its background. In this case every
part of the object is moving at one uniform speed
while every part of the background is moving at some
other uniform speed. An analogous situation with
brightness replacing speed would be a black object on
a white background. In our world it seems to be the
case that the environqlent is full of these local uniformities. All organisms capitalise on this special kind
of redundancy. They ignore the uniformity and pay
InpUl
Serlse
receplors
OUlPUl _~-
Figure 2.2 Diagram of a simple mechanism for contour
extraction .. When stimulated each receptor inhibits its
neighbour. When the stimulation is uniform this mutual
inhibition cancels out any signal from the receptor. However, where there is a change in stimulation (an edge),
there will be receptors which are not inhibited by their
neighbours and which will therefore transmit signals to the
next stage in the perceptual system
particular attention to the parts of the environment
that show a lack of uniformity. This helps them to
distinguish an object from its background. In the case
of simple visual perception this process is contour
extraction. A black square on a white background is
transformed into the outline of a square. This is
achieved by a very simple mechanism called lateral
inhibition. This means that in a grid of sense receptors
each receptor when stimulated inhibits the responses
of its neighbours (Figure 2.2)(von Bekesy, 1967).
Where the stimulation is uniform this mutual inhibition prevents any response. Only where there is a
change in stimulation will a response occur. This
ability of perceptual systems to emphasise change and
Perception 1 7
ignore uniformity occurs in both space and time and
in most modalities. It allows the organism to describe
the environment more economically by assuming that
it has a particular kind of structure. This is the
essential principle underlying all perceptual mechanisms whether they are automatic, i.e. 'wired into'
the nervous system, or whether they result from learning.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3 The components of the two pictures are
equally 'predictable' in the sense that they are constructed
largely of only one tY'pe of element. Picture (a) contains
mostly clusters of black or white elements. Picture (b)
contains mostly horizontally or vertically striped elements.
However we expect pictures to contain mostly clusters and
thus find picture (b) much more complex than picture (a)
18 Basic processes
Because all these systems make assumptions about
the structure of the environment they will break down,
or at least behave in a peculiar way when these
assumptions are not met. Much psychological
research on perception (e.g. the study of optical illusions) has depended on discovering and investigating situations in which the perceptual mechanisms
break down in this way.
So far I have not properly defined terms such as
structure, redundancy and economic description.
There follows a simple and concrete example in which
these terms are used and quantified:
xxxxxxxxoooooooo xoxoxoxooxoxoxox
Both these sequences have equal numbers of xs and
os, yet they are different and both are clearly highly
structured. If the xs and os are taken in pairs both the
sequences can be described very economically. The
first has only one mixed pair (xo) in the middle, the
second has only one unmixed pair (00) in the middle.
Thus each sequence can be described by stating the
position of one type of pair. However the human perceptual system expects sequences of the first type and
therefore pays attention to mixed pairs (ox) even when
this results in descriptions that are far from economical
(ignoring uniformity and noticing change). The evidence for this is that people find sequences of the first
kind easier to remember and can find the rules to describe
them more quickly (Figure 2.3) (Restle, 1967).
This example shows that contour extraction constitutes a basic perceptual process. Because contour
extraction is a peripheral process 'wired into' the
Figure 2.4 There is so much regular contour in this
figure that we find it 'dazzling' to look at and see illusory
movements in it. (From Mackay, 1957, by courtesy of
Nature (London»
nervous system, the amount of contour becomes a
basic property of visual stimuli akin to brightness.
Certain very highly contoured figures seem to overload the receptors and appear dazzling (Figure 2.4).
Furthermore the camouflage adopted by various
animals is clearly aimed at breaking up their contour
lines.
THE PERCEPTION OF OBJECTS
Feature detection
By contour extraction we can reduce a black square
on a white ground to an outline of a square. However there are regularities in this figure which allow us
to give an even more economic description of it. The
lines making up the square are straight, they are
horizontal and vertical, they are equal in length and
joined by 90 degree angles. These aspects of a figure,
straightness, orientation and so on, are referred to as
features. It is hypothesised that there are perceptual
mechanisms which extract such features from an
object thus describing the object in terms of a catalogue of features. These features are abstract entities,
yet their extraction from the scene presented is carried
out at a relatively low level in the perceptual system.
Neurophysiologists have discovered single cells in the
nervous system of cats and monkeys which respond
to features such as lines of a certain orientation in any
part of the visual field, lines moving in certain directions, and so on (Hubel, 1963).
It is clear that from a hierarchy of such feature
detectors we could ultimately obtain single cells that
responded to entities of any degree of abstractness or
specificity required. This would only be useful for
certain important objects that occurred very frequently in the organism's environment. In the case of
humans this might, perhaps, apply to letters of the
alphabet.
If feature extraction is to give an economic description of the environment then only some of the multitude of possible features will be extracted. Which
features are chosen will depend on the properties of
the environment. There is some evidence that this
choosing occurs during early infancy as well as during
the millions of years of evolution. Thus if kittens have
experienced only horizontal lines during the first five
months of life they will not respond to vertical lines
(Blakemore and Cooper, 1970).
It has also been shown that this early visual experience must be active rather than passive (Held, 1965).
If one kitten is pulled round by another in a carriage,
thus having the same visual experience, the kitten with
the passive experience is much inferior to the other in
various visual discriminati0n tasks.
Feature analysis as a perceptual process is not
necessarily tied to single cell mechanisms. It can be
used to explain human performance in many quite
complex situations. Shepard (I963) studied the
learning of morse code. From the confusions people
made between letters he was able to show that two
features of the symbols were being attended to. In the
early stages of practice these features were the number
of elements in the symbol (varying from (E) to .....
(5» and the kind of element in the symbol (varying
from··· (S) to ~~~ (0». In later stages of practice
people attended not to the kind of element in the
symbols, but the heterogeneity (varying from· .. (S)
or ~ ~ ~ (0) to . ~. (R) or ~. ~ (K». This example
demonstrates that even with a simple stimulus like a
morse code letter there are a number of alternative
features that can be attended to, and that people select
only a small proportion of these.
Depth perception
In the study of depth perception we find that many of
the various hypothetical perceptual processes are in~
volved: feature extraction, assumptions about the envir~
onment and model building. Depth is perceived most
directly through the subtle differences between the
pictures presented to the two eyes. Having identified
an object in the two pictures then the greater the dis~
crepancy between the two views of that object the
nearer it is. This is a very simple mechanism except that
it depends on identifying an object as the same from two
different points of view. J ulesz (1965) has shown that
this is done at a relatively peripheral level and even
with random arrays of dots.
If we look at the world with only one eye or
consider objects more than a few feet away then this
Figure 2.5 The three posts in this picture are all identical
in size. However the one on the right looks considerably
larger than the one on the left. This is because the slanting
lines create an impression of depth
Perception 1 9
direct perception of depth is no longer possible. In
these cases the impression of depth depends on the
use of special features and expectations about the en~
vironment. One of the most important is a 'texture
gradient' (Gibson, 1966). As it gets further and
further away from us the fine structure of the environ~
ment gets (ret in ally) closer and closer together ulti~
mately becoming blurred and indistinguishable. The
idealised form of this texture gradient is a' pair of
railway lines which meet in the distance and whose
sleepers become closer and closer together until they
can no longer be distinguished. Such a gradient is
interpreted as indicating depth. This interpretation is
of course quite arbitrary. An example is shown in
Figure 2.5.
The slanting lines elicit an expectation of depth. The
three vertical posts are the same length, but the one
on the right appears longest because the depth inter~
pretation makes us believe it is farther away. Other
cues are overlap, (nearer objects are expected to over~
lap farther ones) and movement parallax (e.g. in a
train the nearby objects move past faster than the
farther ones). All these expectations about the environ~
ment can be falsified, giving rise to illusions. Of
particular interest are the depth cues provided by the
shal?e of ob~ects.
(a) (b) (el
Figure 2.6 (a) This figure is seen as a three~dimensional
wire cube rather than as an irregular two~dimensional
object. However there are two three~dimensional inter~
pretations of the figure and our perception spontaneously
fluctuates from one to the other.
(b) This figure could be a particular view of a wire
rectangle, but also forms a regular two~dimensional
figure. We are less likely to see it in depth.
(c) Shaded areas have been added to figure (a). These
additions make more sense in terms of the two~
dimensional figure and so we are less likely to see it in
depth.
(After Hochberg and McAllister, 1953)
Object (a) in Figure 2.6 tends to be seen as a cube
in depth rather than as a complicated two~dimensional
object. However, the figure is ambiguous as a repre~
sentation of a cube, since we do not know which is the
front and which the back. As we look at the picture
we see the cube spontaneously alter from one form to
the other. Why do we see this picture in depth? One
possibility is that by seeing it as a cube in depth we
can achieve a more economic description of the figure,
20 Basic processes
since a cube is a very simple and regular object. Some
evidence in favour of this notion is given by the
sequence of objects in Figure 2.6 (Hochberg and
McAllister, 1953).
Object (b) presents a very unusual view of a cube in
which the two-dimensional representation also has a
very simple and regular structure. This object is less
likely to be seen in depth. By shading in areas, as in
object (c), we can produce a figure that is simpler in
two dimensions than in three, since, in terms of a
cube, the shaded areas would be in irregular and
unexpected places. This figure is also seldom seen in
depth.
!'--..
I '" .. : 'I I ' L _ _ ----'
Cross sectio~
Seen from in front
(a) Diagram of the Ames 'distorted room'
N "'I":
I'~
~
D
~"
The expectation that the environment will provide
simple and familiar objects can also give rise to
striking illusions. The Ames room is an extremely
distorted room which is interpreted as being rectangular. As a result people standing in it appear to be of
impossibly different sizes (Figure 2.7). It is interesting
that in this demonstration the expectation of rectangular rooms overrides the expectation that people
remain the same size and do not grow when they walk
across a room at the same distance from us. Perhaps
this is because the size of an object is not very important to us (as long as we can recognise .what it is)
except as an indication of distance. Normally the
position of an object in a room gives a better indication of distance than its size.
Constancies
Closely related to depth perception is the phenomenon
of size constancy. We know that objects do not
actually change size as they move away from us, and
we use our knowledge of distance based on depth cues
to compensate for this change and keep the apparent
size of the objects constant. All this is done more or
less automatically and so our view of the world might
show people all more or less the same size sitting in a
rectangular room even though the image on our retina
~ ~
"
(b) Drawing of the appearance of the Ames 'distorted room'
Figure 2.7 We prefer to see this as a picture of a square room containing people of the wrong size rather than a distorted room with people of normal size. (From Vernon, 1962, The Psychology of Perception, by courtesy of Penguin,
London)
would not be in the least like this. That is why
perspective drawing was discovered so recently in art
and is best achieved, not by looking at the scene, but
by knowing the rules about vanishing points and so
on, or stretching strings through a frame as shown in
the picture by Durer (Figure 2.8).
People are very good at estimating the real sizes and
distances of objects, but very bad at estimating their
apparent or retinal size. At art classes they used to
teach students to hold their pencils at arms length to
measure the size of things precisely to overcome this
difficulty.
There are other aspects of objects that we expect to
remain constant: colour, shape and brightness, for
example. The mechanisms involved in these constancies are, in principle, the same as for size constancy. We compensate for changes in illumination,
orientation etc. so that an object retains a constant
identity. Thus a piece of white paper in shadow will
appear lighter than a piece of black paper brightly
illuminated even though the white paper may be
objectively darker. However, this effect will only
occur if we already know that one piece of paper is
Perception 21
white and the other black. If we do not know, then the
objective brightness will be seen. Similarly, a round
table top appears round, even when seen from a very
acute angle making it tI1Uly an ellipse. All these compensatory mechanisms are unconscious and instantaneous yet clearly very sophisticated. Recent research
(Bower, 1966) suggests that they are partially innate,
being already present in infants of 36 days.
FIGURE PERCEPTION
All the constancy phenomena depend on first identifying objects and recognising them as the same in all
circumstances: at different distances, from different
points of view, in different illuminations, etc. The
Gestalt psychologists (Koflka, 1935) suggested a
number of rules which determined how a scene would
be grouped into objects or figures (Figure 2.9). One of
these was common fate which I have already mentioned in the section on contour extraction. If a number of points tend to have common movement which
is different from that of the rest of the scene, these
points will tend to be seen as a single object. Other
rules are closure, good continuation and proximity.
Figure 2.8 A mechanical aid for making perspective drawings. The need for such an aid illustrates the difficulty we
have in drawing what we 'see' rather than what we 'know'. (From The Complete Woodcuts of Albrecht Diirer, 1963.
(W. Kurth, editor) by courtesy of Dover, New York)
22 Basic proc"esses
It has been suggested (Hochberg and McAllister,
1953) that all these effects result from perceptual
mechanisms that seek economic descriptions and
capitalise on expected properties of the environment.
An object is defined as something that has invariant
properties when compensations for various transformations due to distance, illumination and so on
have been allowed for. The object is important and is
noticed. The various effects for which compensations
have been made are not important and are ignored
once they have been used to construct the object. The
perceptual system seeks invariance and develops more
and more sophisticated ways to compensate and
transform the scene to produce invariance. This
(a)
Figure 2.9 Gestalt principles of perceptual organisation
method of describing the world is carried over into
science. Water is conceived as an invariant substance although heat may transform it from ice into
steam.
Most of the perceptual mechanisms discussed so
far developed during the course of evolution or early
infancy. Thus abnormalities in these mechanisms
occur only through gross brain damage or severe drug
intoxication. Certain drugs, such as LSD and mescaline, seem to affect the perception of space, perhaps
(b)
(c)
(a) The upper figure is seen as four thin posts (grouping by proximity). However, by joining the tops of the lines as in
the lower figure, three thick posts are seen instead (grouping by closure).
(b) This figure is seen as a circle in front of a square, although the missing part of the 'square' could be any shape.
We choose the 'simplest' interpretation of the situation, and that influences what we 'see'.
(c) This figure is seen as a diamond between two parallel lines rather than as a Wand an M. The figure is perceived
in terms of components with maximum regularity, symmetry and hence simplicity even though Wand M have frequently
been seen before.
Perception 23
"~~. . ~ . , ~ r'\
- h ... ' ' . "- , , .lo\" . ' ' I • 't ._ .' . ' -c' . ~~ J - '. . r •
2
3 4
5 6 7
Figure 2. IO Seven records of eye movements by the same subject. Each record lasted 3 minutes. The subject examined
the reproduction with both eyes. (I) Free examination of the picture. Before the subsequent recording sessions, the subject
was asked to: (2) estimate the material circumstances of the family in the picture; (3) give the ages of the people; (4)
surmise what the family had been doing before the arrival of the 'unexpected visitor'; (5) remember the clothes worn by the
people; (6) remember the position of the people and objects in the room; (7) estimate how long the 'unexpected visitor'
had been away from the family. (From Yarbus, 1967, by courtesy of Plenum Press)
by making the subject more aware of his retinal image
through failure to make use of size and depth cues.
Other constancies, such as that conserving colour,
also break down.
THE PERCEPTION OF COMPLEX OBJECTS
So far we have considered perceptual mechanisms
which apply to general aspects of the environment. In
contrast I now want to consider particular aspects,
aspects which are relevant only at a particular moment
and which cannot therefore be picked out by evolution
or learning during infancy. The observer has already
transformed his scene into a space containing objects.
However there is still an enormous amount of information in this transformed scene and he must make
his description of it still more economic. He therefore
tries to discover patterns and structures specific to this
particular scene that are relevant to his needs at that
particular moment.
Eye movements
The simplest way of cutting down the information in
a scene is to look only at the important aspects. We
can see this happening if we study a person's eye
movements. Yarbus (1967) invented an ingenious
technique for doing this, which allowed the experimenter to observe the successive fixations of the eye of the
subject and relate them to the scene being studied
(Figure 2.10).
These fixations are far from random. They tend to
follow the contours of the picture and pick out 'important' and 'interesting' details. Yarbus showed his
subjects a picture, 'the unexpected visitor', and asked
them various questions about it. Different questions
induced different patterns of eye movements which
showed that the subjects were looking only at the
features relevant for answering the particular question.
When schizophrenic and brain-damaged patients were
shown the same picture their eye movements were not
regular and structured, their fixation points seemed to
be scattered randomly over the picture. It appeared
that they were unable to pick out the important
features. O'Connor and Hermelin (1967) found a
similar effect with autistic children. The children
24 Basic processes
looked into a box containing three displays on a matt
black background. The autistic children spent more
time looking at the background than either the normal
or the subnormal control groups whatever was shown
in the displays. It seems that autistic children, like
schizophrenic adults, fail to pay attention to the
important aspects of a scene. This could account for
their apparent avoidance of the eyes of other people,
since the face and eyes are the most important feature
of a person and therefore receive a relatively large
amount of attention from normal people.
Selective attention
It is clear that by moving our eyes we can switch our
attention from one part of a scene to another. However
we can also direct our attention in other modalities
(e.g. hearing) where the sense organs can not so
obviously be directed. A classic example of this kind
of selective attention has come to be known as 'the
cocktail party problem' (Cherry, 1957). At a party we
are likely to be bombarded with loud music and
several conversations going on simultaneously.
Nevertheless we can attend to one of these conversations and ignore the rest.
There are thus two linked properties of our ability
to attend: we can direct our attention and our attention
span is limited. Thus our ability to selectively attend is
both advantageous (we can pick out one conversation
among many) and disadvantageous (we can only
attend to one conversation at a time). The limits of
our attention span are determined by the information
content of the messages we are attending to. Mowbray
(1953) had subjects read one prose passage while at
the same time listening to another. With easy passages
subjects could take in both quite well, but with
difficult passages they did much worse than when
dealing with one passage at a time. Cherry (1957) had
subjects attend to a prose passage played into one ear
and than asked them what they had heard in the other
ear. He found that they could tell him nothing at all
about the verbal content of the unattended passage,
but could report certain physical characteristics such
as whether it was a man or a woman's voice or a pure
tone.
In order to select one message and ignore another
we must initially attend to both messages in order to
make the selection. Broadbent (1958) has called such
a system a 'filter' selecting between different 'input
channels'. This filter performs a classification of this
input on the basis of simple physical characteristics
such as sight v. sound, male v. female voice, words
coming from the left rather than the right and so on.
However this filter cannot pick out messages purely
on the basis of meaning (Treisman, 1961). The filter
does not eliminate the unattended channel completely.
When the subject's own name is presented in the
unattended channel it is usually heard whereas a
neutral word is not (Moray, 1959).
It is probable that there is another, less efficient
filter at a later stage in the system which classifies on
the basis of more abstract features like word meaning
rather than physical characteristics. Thus we can
attend to colour names and ignore numbers even
when they are alternating between the two ears (e.g.
left ear: four red eight, right ear: green seven blue)
(Yntema and Trask, 1963).
Pattern detection
The problem with studying natural scenes is that we
do not know what the patterns and rules in the scene
may be and so we cannot judge whether people
successfully find them or not. One solution to this
problem is to make up scenes containing special
patterns and see whether people can find these. Such
artificial scenes tend to be extremely simple. Frith
(1970) presented binary sequences to children. These
consisted of two words or two coloured counters
following one another in various patterns: e.g. horse
spoon horse horse spoon horse horse spoon horse.
This is a fairly simple pattern. The triad horse spoon
horse is repeated three times and so it is possible to
code the pattern into a more economic form. Other
patterns were presented which were more complex
and could not be described so economically. Normal
children clearly perceived these rules because they
could remember the simple patterns better than the
complex ones, and made errors of the kind expected if
they were reconstructing the sequences on the basis of
the rules they had discovered in them. Autistic children
on the other hand appeared to have difficulty in
perceiving the rules and remembered the simple
sequences no better than the complex ones. They
made errors which suggested that they were constructing their remembered sequences on the basis of rules
that had not been present in the original sequences.
If you present children or adults with completely
random sequences for which no economic description
can be found then they will impose their own patterns
upon them (Yacorzynski, 1941). For example you can
ask someone to guess the colours of successive cards
presented in random order. A young child will tend to
guess alternatively black and red. An adult will guess,
wrongly, that if a number of black cards have occurred
in succession the next one is very probably going to
be red.
Here we have two complementary processes in the
perception of complex stimuli: the discovery of
patterns and the imposition of patterns. As the
difficulty or randomness of the stimuli increases
people will tend to impose their own patterns. Autistic
children much of the time seem to impose their own
idiosyncratic patterns on their perception of the world
suggesting that they find the world random and
meaningless.
More complex sequences with which we are very
familiar are written and spoken language. Here some
of the underlying rules are the rules of grammar. If we
are presented with a text in which every other word is
missing we could make a fairly good job of reconstructing it, by making use of our knowledge of these
rules. However if the text was a transcription of the
speech of a schizophrenic patient this task of reconstruction would be much more difficult (Silverman,
1972). Thus these patients are not using the expected
rules properly or perhaps are using idiosyncratic rules
of their own. We say that a normal passage of writing
contains constraints in the sense that each word is
partially determined by those before and after it. We
can also construct unconstrained word lists by
selecting words at random from a dictionary. As you
would expect, normal people can remember much
longer sequences of text than they can of random
word lists, since they make use ofthe rules oflanguage.
However, neither adult schizophrenics nor autistic
children gain as much from the constraints provided
by the rules of language (Lawson et ai., 1964;
Hermelin and O'Connor, 1967). This does not appear
to be due to a specific language deficit, but to a
general difficulty of perception, a difficulty in finding
rules and patterns.
Multidimensional stimuli
Another way of constructing economic descriptions of
complex stimuli is to combine many low order features
into a few high order concepts. The human face
provides us with an overabundance of information. It
contains many features: eyes, mouth, hair, etc. all of
which vary along many dimensions. We can describe
it in terms of a few higher order concepts such as
attractiveness, intelligence and so on. One of the most
tractable of these higher order concepts (which
appears in all police descriptions of wanted men) is
age. We presumably arrive at an estimate of a person's
age from many cues although we are unaware of
most of them. Some of the more obvious cues are
amount of hair and number of wrinkles. This single
concept, age, clearly carries a large amount of information about the appearance of a face. One of the
phenomena that help us to arrive at such a concept is
the correlation between the various features involved.
For example people with grey hair will tend to have
wrinkles, and most of the other signs of age.
It is difficult to study the perception of real faces
since we do not know what their important dimensions
Figure 2.11 Four schematic faces varying in length of
nose, height of eyes, height of mouth and distance apart of
eyes. Normal people can use these features systematically
to arrive at ratings of 'friendliness' for the whole face
Perception 25
of variation are. Artificial stimuli of such complexity
are difficult to produce and the schematic faces that
have been studied are rather far from reality. Grodin
and Brown (1967) constructed schematic faces with
three variable features: length of chin, distance
between eyes and length of forehead (Figure 2.11).
They demonstrated that when people judged the
faces for degree of friendliness they combined the
three features in a consistent manner. Thus, knowing
the state of the three features, one could predict how
friendly a particular person would find that face.
Paranoid schizophrenic patients failed to combine the
features in this consistent way. Bannister and Fransella
(1966) have also shown that thought disordered
schizophrenics have difficulty in assigning concepts
such as friendliness, kindness, etc. consistently to
photographs of unknown people. It has been suggested
that schizophrenic patients suffer from a kind of
perceptual overload (Payne, 1973). They appear to
behave as if bombarded with more information than
they can cope with. This suggests that some of the
perceptual processes concerned with constructing
economic descriptions of the environment have
broken down. The schizophrenic patient is unable to
discover patterns in the environment and has lost
many of the expectations about the environment that
'normal' people have. Thus they will have to impose
idiosyncratic patterns and expectations of their own.
Creativity too depends on seeing novel patterns and
relationships in [he world. The difference between
creativity and madness is perhaps merely that the
patterns seen by the creative person are eventually
also seen by a sizeable minority of other people. 